# JavaScript Basics

In this section, we will learn where JavaScript came from and about the most atomic part of it, *primitives*.

## A Brief History of JavaScript

- In 1995 Netscape published the first version of JavaScript and it was compatible with Netscape Navigator.
- To avoid potential patent issues with Sun Microsystems and their trademark on 'Java', Microsoft published JScript in 1996 for Internet Explorer.
- Around 1997, JavaScript was turned over to the European Computer Manufacturers Association (ECMA) to maintain as a free and open standard called ECMAScript version 1.
- ECMAScript 2 was released in 1998.
- ECMAScript 3 was released in 1999.
- From 2005 to 2007, there was a bunch of drama. EMCA wanted ECMAScript 4, others didn't. For awhile, the next version was called ECMAScript 3.1.
- With progress in JavaScript stalled, libraries like Prototype, jQuery, Dojo and Mootools grew in popularity.
- Between 2008 and 2009, all the fighting parties from the years prior reconciled and renamed ECMAScript 3.1 to ECMAScript 5.
- In June of 2015, [EMCAScript 6](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/New_in_JavaScript/ECMAScript_6_support_in_Mozilla) was approved and published as the new standard.
- In the future, JavaScript will be treated as a living standard. That is, instead of new features being added in a big release every few years, each feature is treated as an individual entity that is reviewed, approved, and implemented in its own time.

# Primitives Data Types

In JavaScript there are 6 primitive data types.

- Boolean
- Null
- Number
- String
- Symbol
- Undefined

Primitives have no methods and are not objects, don't worry, we'll cover what this means soon enough.

---

## Boolean

A **boolean** is a logical data type that can have only the values `true` or `false`.

We can define booleans using literal syntax.

```javascript
var f = false;
var t = true;
```

We use booleans to conditionally run block of code (more on that later).

```javascript
var f = false;
if (f) {
    // Code in here will not run
}

var t = true;
if (t) {
    // Code in here will run
}
```

We can also define booleans using their wrapper syntax `new Boolean()`. **There is never actually a reason to do this though.** Here, the value of `b` is an object and not immediately useful. We access the value of a primitive defined this way by invoking the `valueOf()` method.

```javascript
var b = new Boolean(true);
b.valueOf();
// true
```

We can convert values to boolean by using `Boolean()` as a function. Values that evaluate to `true` are said to be *truthy* while those that evaluate to `false` are *falsy*.

```javascript
// All True
Boolean(true);
Boolean(1);
Boolean(-1);
Boolean('Hello Guys');
Boolean('');
Boolean({});
Boolean([]);

// All False
Boolean(false);
Boolean();
Boolean(0);
Boolean(NaN);
Boolean(null);
Boolean(undefined);
```

> Exercise Break!
> Give me three examples of values that are truthy.

---

## Null

The primitive value `null` represents an empty value. A variable with the value `null` exists, but it is explicitly without value.

```javascript
var n = null;
```

We typically use `null` to signify that a function is unable to return a useful value.

---

## Number

**Numbers** are... numbers? Unlike some other languages, JavaScript doesn't differentiate between integer and decimal numbers.

We can define numbers using literal syntax.

```javascript
var integer  = 100;
var negative = -15;
var decimal  = 3.14;
```

Numbers can be defined using the wrapper syntax. **Again, don't to that.**

```javascript
var number = new Number(213);
number.valueOf();
// 213
```

We can convert strings to numbers by using `Number()` as a function.

```javascript
var no = Number("1123");
no;
// 1123
```

### Special Numbers

When we divide a number by zero, the result is `Infinity`. A negative number divided by zero yields `-Infinity`.

```javascript
82 / 0;
// Infinity
-19 / 0;
// -Infinity
```

When we call a function that would affect a number, or that would normally produce a number, but can't, we get `NaN`.

```javascript
Math.sqrt(-1);
// NaN
Number("abc123");
// NaN
parseInt('abc123', 10);
// NaN
```

### Number Methods

There are several methods we can invoke to produce numbers. The function `parseInt()` parses a string and returns a number in the specified *base* or *radix*.

```javascript
// usage
parseInt(string, radix);

// These all return 255
parseInt('ff', 16);
parseInt('0xff', 16);
parseInt('11111111', 2);
parseInt('255.5', 10);
parseInt('255hey this is not a number', 10);
```

The function `parseFloat()` similarly parses a string and returns a decimal number. Each of the following examples returns the value `3.14`.

```javascript
parseFloat("3.14");
parseFloat("314e-2");
parseFloat("0.0314E+2");
parseFloat("3.14this is not a number either");
```

---

## String

A **String** is a sequence of characters. String literals are enclosed in quotes.

```javascript
var singleQuotes = 'This string is contained in single quotes.';
var doubleQuotes = "This string is contained in double quotes.";
```

In EcmaScript 6 the template string was introduced.

```javascript
var templateString = `This is a template string.`;
```

We *can* define Strings using the wrapper syntax, but if you've been paying any attention, you know, **we shouldn't do that**.

```javascript
var string = new String('Why does this syntax exist?');
string.valueOf();
// "Why does this syntax exist?"
```

Other data types can be converted to a string using the `String()` function.

```javascript
var conversion1 = String(true);
// "true"
var conversion2 = String(101.3);
// "101.3"
```

### Accessing individual characters in strings

JavaScript provides two ways of accessing characters within a string, first is the `charAt()` method. *It is important to note that both methods place the first character at index 0.*

```javascript
var panagram = 'Pack my box with five dozen liquor jugs.';
panagram.charAt(0);
// "P"
panagram.charAt(10);
// "x"
```

We can also treat the string like it was an array, and use a bracket expression to access a character.

```javascript
panagram[24];
// "z"
panagram[39];
// "."
```

### How big is it?

We can determing the length of a string by calling its `length` propery. The length of the string in the `panagram` variable is 40.

```javascript
panagram.length;
// 40
```

### Concatenating Strings

Sometimes, we have two (or more) strings and we want combine those strings. The first way to do this is to use the `concat()` function.

```javascript
var part1 = "They've done studies, you know. ";
var part2 = "60% of the time, it works every time.";
part1.concat(part2);
// "They've done studies, you know. 60% of the time, it works every time."
```

The function `concat()` accepts many arguments.

```javascript
var sanDiego1 = "Discovered by the Germans in 1904, ";
var sanDiego2 = "they named it San Diego, ";
var sanDiego3 = "which of course in German means a whale's vagina.";
sanDiego1.concat(sanDiego2, sanDiego3);
// Discovered by the Germans in 1904, they named it San Diego, which of course in German means a whale's vagina.
```

Additionally, we can use the plus sign `+` operator to concatenate strings.

```javascript
var firstName  = 'William';
var middleName = 'Fontaine dela Tour';
var lastName   = 'Dauterive';
firstName + ' ' + middleName + ' ' + lastName;
```

---

## Symbol

New in ECMAScript 6, **Symbols** are values that may be used as an object key and are immutable and unique. Following is an example of how a symbol is used, but don't worry if you don't understand it, we'll cover it again when we talk about objects, or [read more about it here](http://www.2ality.com/2014/12/es6-symbols.html).

```javascript
var bond = Symbol();
var obj = {
    [bond]: '007'
};
obj[bond];
// 007
```

---

## Undefined

When a variable has been declared but not assigned a value and we try to reference it, we get the value `undefined`.

```javascript
var chocolate = 'delicious';
var vanilla;

typeof chocolate;
// "string"
typeof vanilla;
// "undefined"
```

Furthermore, a function that doesn't include the `return` keyword returns `undefined`.

# Review

We now know a rough history of JavaScript and about the six primitive data types, `Boolean`, `Null`, `Number`, `String`, `Symbol`, and `Undefined`.

# Exercises

1. What are the defining characteristics of the data types, `Boolean`, `Null`, `Number`, `String`, and `Undefined`?
