# JavaScript Basics

In this section, we will learn where JavaScript came from, about the most atomic parts of it, *primitives*, and how some methods available to those primitives.

# Pre-class Preperations

Read:

- [The nature of the language](http://www.2ality.com/2013/06/basic-javascript.html#sect_nature)
- [Boolean](http://www.2ality.com/2013/06/basic-javascript.html#sect_booleans)
- [Numbers](http://www.2ality.com/2013/06/basic-javascript.html#sect_numbers)
- [Strings](http://www.2ality.com/2013/06/basic-javascript.html#sect_strings)

Create a new folder called *primitives* and files called *index.html* and *primitives.js* and set up new *package.json* and *gulpfile.js*.

## A Brief History of JavaScript

- In 1995 Netscape published the first version of JavaScript and it was compatible with Netscape Navigator.
- To avoid potential patent issues with Sun Microsystems and their trademark on 'Java', Microsoft published JScript in 1996 for Internet Explorer.
- Around 1997, JavaScript was turned over to the European Computer Manufacturers Association (ECMA) to maintain as a free and open standard called ECMAScript version 1.
- ECMAScript 2 was released in 1998.
- ECMAScript 3 was released in 1999.
- From 2005 to 2007, there was a bunch of drama. EMCA wanted ECMAScript 4, others didn't. For awhile, the next version was called ECMAScript 3.1.
- With progress in JavaScript stalled, libraries like Prototype, jQuery, Dojo and Mootools grew in popularity.
- Between 2008 and 2009, all the fighting parties from the years prior reconciled and renamed ECMAScript 3.1 to ECMAScript 5.
- In June of 2015, [EMCAScript 6](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/New_in_JavaScript/ECMAScript_6_support_in_Mozilla) was approved and published as the new standard.
- In the future, JavaScript will be treated as a living standard. That is, instead of new features being added in a big release every few years, each feature is treated as an individual entity that is reviewed, approved, and implemented in its own time.

# Primitives Data Types

In JavaScript there are 6 primitive data types.

- Boolean
- Null
- Number
- String
- Symbol
- Undefined

Primitives have no methods and are not objects, don't worry, we'll cover what this means soon enough.

---

## Boolean

A **boolean** is a logical data type that can have only the values `true` or `false`.

We can define booleans using literal syntax.

```javascript
var f = false;
var t = true;
```

We use booleans to conditionally run block of code (more on that later).

```javascript
var f = false;
if (f) {
    // Code here will not run
}

var t = true;
if (t) {
    // Code here will run
}
```

We can also define booleans using their wrapper syntax `new Boolean()`. **Though there is never actually a reason to do this.** Here, the value of `b` is an object and not immediately useful. We access the value of a primitive defined this way by invoking the `valueOf()` method.

```javascript
var b = new Boolean(true);
b.valueOf();
// true
```

We can convert values to boolean by using `Boolean()` as a function. Values that evaluate to `true` are said to be *truthy* while those that evaluate to `false` are *falsy*.

```javascript
// All True
Boolean(true);
Boolean(1);
Boolean(-1);
Boolean('Hello Guys');
Boolean({});
Boolean([]);

// All False
Boolean(false);
Boolean();
Boolean(0);
Boolean('');
Boolean(NaN);
Boolean(null);
Boolean(undefined);
```

#### Exercise Break!

> Provide three examples of values that are truthy.  
> Can you find any other examples of values that are falsy?  
> Let's look at the examples boolean values above, can you find any patterns regarding what converts to true or false when we call `Boolean()` as a function?  

---

## Null

The primitive value `null` represents an empty value. A variable with the value `null` exists, but it is explicitly without value.

```javascript
var n = null;
```

We typically use `null` to signify that a function is unable to return a useful value.

---

## Number

**Numbers** are... numbers? Unlike some other languages, JavaScript doesn't differentiate between integer and decimal numbers.

We can define numbers using literal syntax.

```javascript
var integer  = 100;
var negative = -15;
var decimal  = 3.14;
```

Numbers can be defined using the wrapper syntax. **Again, don't to that.**

```javascript
var number = new Number(213);
number.valueOf();
// 213
```

We can convert strings to numbers by using `Number()` as a function.

```javascript
var no = Number("1123");
no;
// 1123
```

#### Exercise Break!

> Provide three examples of positive or negative integers and decimal numbers.  
> Convert a string value to a number  
> Can you think of any situations where we would want numbers instead of strings?  
> Can you think of any situations where we would want string numbers instead of numbers?  

### Special Numbers

When we divide a number by zero, the result is `Infinity`. A negative number divided by zero yields `-Infinity`.

```javascript
82 / 0;
// Infinity
-19 / 0;
// -Infinity
```

When we call a function that would affect a number, or that would normally produce a number, but can't, we get `NaN`.

```javascript
Math.sqrt(-1);
// NaN
Number("abc123");
// NaN
parseInt('abc123', 10);
// NaN
```

### Number functions

There are several functions we can invoke to produce numbers. The function `parseInt()` parses a string and returns a number in the specified *base* or *radix*.

> We are going to talk about just what functions are soon enough, for now I just want you to know that functions exist specifically for numbers.  

```javascript
// usage
parseInt(string, radix);

// These all return 255
parseInt('ff', 16);
parseInt('0xff', 16);
parseInt('11111111', 2);
parseInt('255.5', 10);
parseInt('255hey this is not a number', 10);
```

The function `parseFloat()` similarly parses a string and returns a decimal number. Each of the following examples returns the value `3.14`.

```javascript
parseFloat("3.14");
parseFloat("314e-2");
parseFloat("0.0314E+2");
parseFloat("3.14this is not a number either");
```

---

## String

A **String** is a sequence of characters. String literals are enclosed in quotes.

```javascript
var singleQuotes = 'This string is contained in single quotes.';
var doubleQuotes = "This string is contained in double quotes.";
```

In EcmaScript 6, the template string was introduced.

```javascript
var templateString = `This is a template string.`;
```

We *can* define Strings using the wrapper syntax, but if you've been paying any attention, you know, **we shouldn't do that**.

```javascript
var string = new String('Why does this syntax exist?');
string.valueOf();
// "Why does this syntax exist?"
```

Other data types can be converted to a string using the `String()` function.

```javascript
var conversion1 = String(true);
// "true"
var conversion2 = String(101.3);
// "101.3"
```

JavaScript provides two ways of accessing characters within a string, first is the `charAt()` method. *It is important to note that both methods place the first character at index 0.*

```javascript
var panagram = 'Pack my box with five dozen liquor jugs.';
panagram.charAt(0);
// "P"
panagram.charAt(10);
// "x"
```

We can also treat the string like it was an array, and use a bracket expression to access a character.

```javascript
panagram[24];
// "z"
panagram[39];
// "."
```

### How big is it?

We can determine the length of a string by calling its `length` property. The length of the string in the `panagram` variable is 40.

```javascript
panagram.length;
// 40
```

#### Exercise Break!

> 1. Convert to boolean `false` to a string  
> 2. Convert the numbers `72`, `-0.833`, and `4000` to strings  

### Accessing individual characters in strings

### Concatenating Strings

Sometimes, we have two (or more) strings and we want combine those strings. The first way to do this is to use the `concat()` function.

```javascript
var part1 = "They've done studies, you know. ";
var part2 = "60% of the time, it works every time.";
part1.concat(part2);
// "They've done studies, you know. 60% of the time, it works every time."
```

The function `concat()` accepts many arguments.

```javascript
var sanDiego1 = "Discovered by the Germans in 1904, ";
var sanDiego2 = "they named it San Diego, ";
var sanDiego3 = "which of course in German means a whale's vagina.";
sanDiego1.concat(sanDiego2, sanDiego3);
// Discovered by the Germans in 1904, they named it San Diego, which of course in German means a whale's vagina.
```

Additionally, we can use the plus sign `+` operator to concatenate strings.

```javascript
var firstName  = 'William';
var middleName = 'Fontaine dela Tour';
var lastName   = 'Dauterive';
console.log(firstName + ' ' + middleName + ' ' + lastName);
```

### Using Template Strings Instead of Concatenating

Template strings provide us a way to do things we used to need concatenation to do. Take the following example:

```javascript
var myFirstName  = ''; // Enter your first name here.
var myLastName   = ''; // Enter your last name here.
console.log(`Hello, ${myFirstName} ${myLastName}, I am pleased to meet you!`);
```

Here, we use template *placeholders* in the template string which are replaced with the variables of the same names.

#### Exercise Break!

> 1. Create three variables `firstName`, `middleName`, and `lastName` that contain your names and concatenate them.  
> 2. Try concatenating string with some of the other data types (numbers, null, undefined, and booleans), what happens?  

---

## Symbol

New in ECMAScript 6, **Symbols** are values that may be used as an object key, are immutable and unique. Following is an example of how a symbol is used, but don't worry if you don't understand it, we'll cover it again when we talk about objects, or [read more about it here](http://www.2ality.com/2014/12/es6-symbols.html).

```javascript
var bond = Symbol();
var obj = {
    [bond]: '007'
};
obj[bond];
// 007
```

---

## Undefined

When a variable has been declared but not assigned a value and we try to reference it, we get the value `undefined`.

```javascript
var chocolate = 'delicious';
var vanilla;

typeof chocolate;
// "string"
typeof vanilla;
// "undefined"
```

Furthermore, a function that doesn't include the `return` keyword always returns `undefined`.

# Review

Review the code you wrote in the 'src/' folder to that generated into the 'dist/', what differences do you see in the code?

We now know a rough history of JavaScript and about the six primitive data types, `Boolean`, `Null`, `Number`, `String`, `Symbol`, and `Undefined`.

# Assessment

1. Convert these numbers to integers: 9.8, 7.3434343
2. Convert these numbers to a string: 78378473, 1765
6. What is `null`?
3. Concatenate these strings: "I", "Love", "JS"
4. What is a boolean? How do you think it might be used?
5. Use the `typeof` operator to determine the following data types: "JS", 76, "1776", 8.5, true, false
6. What does `undefined` mean?

# Exercises

1) Write a blog post about what you've learned in this lesson.

2) What are the defining characteristics of the data types, `Boolean`, `Null`, `Number`, `String`, and `Undefined`?

3) What is the difference between `null` and `undefined`?

4) Create a list of strings. Each string should represent one of the words from the NATO phonetic alphabet. The list should contain 26 words.

5) Rewrite the concatenation examples from above using template strings.
