# JavaScript Syntax and Variables

In this section, we will learn the basics of JavaScript Syntax and how to define, modify, and retrieve variables. We will also learn the new variable assignment keywords introduced in ECMAScript 6 (ES6) and talk briefly about scope.

# Pre-class Preperations

Read:

- [Syntax](http://www.2ality.com/2013/06/basic-javascript.html#sect_syntax)
- [Statements and Expressions](http://www.2ality.com/2012/09/expressions-vs-statements.html)
- [Variables and Assignment](http://www.2ality.com/2013/06/basic-javascript.html#sect_variables_assignment)

Create a new folder called *syntax* and files called *index.html* and *syntax.js* and set up new *package.json*, *gulpfile.js*, and *.eslintrc.

---

## Statements and Expressions

JavaScript has two major categories of syntax, *statements* and *expressions*.

**Statements** perform actions, for example, loops and if-statements:

```javascript
for (let i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
  console.log(i);
}
```

**Expressions** produce values. They might be the right-side of a variable declaration or the arguments to a function. Here's a few examples of expressions:

```javascript
10 + 5;
Math.PI;
'a'.concat('b');
```

Let's look at two examples of code that produce the same effect, one is a statement and the other an expression.

```javascript
// The following is a statement
var x;
if (y >= 0) {
    x = 100;
} else {
    x = -100;
}

// The following is an expression
var x = (y >= 0) ? 100 : -100;
```

#### Exercise Break!

> 1. Create five examples of expressions.
> 2. Look at the following, are they an expression or a statement?
>     a. `someVariable`
>     a. `5 * 5`
>     a. `if ( true ) { /* true */ } else { /* false */ }`
>     a. `Boolean(1);`
>     a. `'The rain in Spain'.charAt(7)`

---

## Semicolons

Semicolons are not always required in JavaScript, however I recommend you always use them. Semicolons should always be placed at the end of a statement.

```javascript
var foo = 'A car named Herbie'; // ← Notice that semicolon
var fun = function() {}; // ← That one, too.
```

#### Exercise Break!

> 1. Create some statements with and without semicolons, what happens?

---

## Comments

Comments are lines in code that aren't interpreted, JavaScript has two kinds, single- and multi-line comments. Single-line comments start with two forward slashes (//) and run until the end of the line.

```javascript
bar++; // single-line comment
```

Multi-line comments start with `/*` and end with `*/`

```javascript
/* Alas, poor Yorick! I knew him, Horatio, a fellow of infinite
   jest, of most excellent fancy. He hath bore me on his back a
   thousand times, and now how abhorr'd in my imagination it is!
   My gorge rises at it. Here hung those lips that I have kissed
   I know not how oft. Where be your gibes now? Your gambols?
   Your songs? Your flashes of merriment, that were wont to set
   the table on a roar?
 */
```

*Instructor will demonstrate DocBlock format and discuss different trains of thought regarding how to comment code.*

#### Exercise Break!

> 1. Add comments to the code we've already written.
> 1. Why is it important to comment our code?

# Variables

A **Variable** is the named location for storing a value.

---

## Declaring Variables

To declare a variable, we use the `var` keyword and follow that with a name. Let's declare a variable now.

```javascript
var fizz;
```

Here we've declared a variable named 'fizz'.

---

## Giving Variables Names

When we declare a variable, the name must start with an upper- or lower-case letter, a dollar sign ($), or an underscore '_' and can contain any of those plus numbers.

```javascript
// Valid variable names
var hamlet;
var Ophelia;
var HORATIO;
var _laertes;
var $gertrude;
var Yorick54321;
var _;
var $$;

// Invalid variable names
var 4tinbras;
var @Amleto;
```

We can also define several variables with a single keyword.

```javascript
var Scout,
    Jem,
    Atticus,
    Tom;
```

---

## Assigning Value to Variables

Returning to the example above, 'fizz' has no value, so it is `undefined`. We can assign it a value by invoking its name and using the `=` operator.

```javascript
var fizz;
fizz = 9001; // It's over 9000!
```

Now, the variable `fizz` has a value of 9001. We can change its value simply by assigning it a new value.

```javascript
fizz = 'Nine thousand one.'; // No one says 'Nine thousand AND one, right?'
```

We can also assign a variable its value at the same time it is declared.

```javascript
var paper = 'Dunder Mifflin';
```

*Instructor will demonstrate setting variables from form fields.*

---

## Getting the Value of a Variable

To retrieve the value of a variable, we just invoke it.

```javascript
var catSound = 'Meow';

console.log(catSound);
// Meow
```

#### Exercise Break!

> 1. Create variables for your name, your age, your favorite color, and a boolean that answers the question, *Did you eat a hamburger today?*.

# Let and Const

With ES6, we got two new keywords for defining variables, `let` and `const` and each differs from the `var` keyword in useful ways.

---

## Const

One criticism of JavaScript for many years was that there were no read-only variables. As a result, we as developers, were relegated to unenforceable coding conventions to provide context in our code. The common convention for variables that should not change was to use all UPPERCASE in the variable name.

```javascript
// Please, please, please, don't change these.
var DB_USER = 'root';
var DB_PASS = '123456';
```

With modern JavaScript, we have the `const` keyword. Using `const`, we can declare a variable once and be confident that it cannot be overwritten. By the way, we still use all UPPERCASE to demonstrate that a variable is constant, but with the `const` keyword, we enforce its permanence.

```javascript
const PASSWORD = 'baseball';
PASSWORD;
// "baseball"
PASSWORD = 'dragon';
PASSWORD;
// "baseball"
```

When we declare a variable using the `const` keyword, remember that we must always assign a value at the same time, or we'll get a `SyntaxError`.

#### Exercise Break!

> 1. Define a constant with your birthday as the value.
> 1. Can you think of any reasons to use constants?

---

## Let and Variable Scope

The need for the keyword `let` arose because many developers of other languages were unhappy with the way JavaScript handles a concept called scope. When a variable is defined with the `var` keyword, that variable is available in all associated sub-scopes.

Take for example, the following function:

```javascript
function varTest() {
    'use strict';
    var foo = 500;

    if (true) {
        var foo = 9;
        console.log('Inner foo =', foo);
    }

    console.log('Outer foo =', foo);
}

varTest();
// Console output:
// Inner foo = 9
// Outer foo = 9
```

Here, we've defined a function called `varTest()`. Within, a variable named `foo` is declared and it is given a value of 500. Inside the sub-scope of the `if` statement, we redeclare the `foo` variable and give it the value 9. Finally, we output the value of `foo` in both the inner- and outer scopes. Let's invoke the function with `varTest()`.

Let us try this exercise again with the `let` keyword instead of `var`.

```javascript
function letTest() {
    'use strict';

    let foo = 500;

    if (true) {
        let foo = 9;
        console.log('Inner foo =', foo);
    }

    console.log('Outer foo =', foo);
}

letTest();
// Console output:
// Inner foo = 9
// Outer foo = 500
```

In this example, the first variable `foo` is again given a value of 500. In the sub-scope of the `if` statement, we again redeclare `foo`, however, with `let`, a variable only exists in the scope it was created. This means that `foo` contains the value 500 in the out in the outer scope and the value 9 in the inner scope. Let's invoke the function with `letTest()` to see it in action.

# Review

Review the code you wrote in the 'src/' folder to that generated into the 'dist/', what differences do you see in the code?

We now know that in JavaScript, *expressions* produce values like `3 + 2` and *statements* make things happen, such as variable value assignments (`var bar = 'baz;`). We learned that we should **always** end our statements with a semicolon. We also discovered both single- and multi line comments.

We have been introduced to the `var`, `const`, and `let` keywords and should be able to explain the differences.

# Assessment

1. Write an example of an expression.
2. Write an example of a statement.
3. Why do we need semicolons?
4. Why should we comment our code?
5. Create variables describing yourself containing at least one each of a string, number, and boolean value.
