# Array, Objects, Maps, and Sets

In this section, we will.

1. Learn how to create and modify `arrays`.
1. Learn how to create and modify `objects`.
1. Learn how to create and modify the ES6 collections, `Map` and `Set`.

# Pre-class Reading and Watching

- [Five little-known facts about ES5 object literals](http://www.2ality.com/2015/08/object-literals-es5.html)
- [Arrays](http://www.2ality.com/2013/06/basic-javascript.html#sect_arrays)
- [Objects and Inheritance](http://www.2ality.com/2013/06/basic-javascript.html#sect_objects)
- [ES6 in Depth: Collections(https://hacks.mozilla.org/2015/06/es6-in-depth-collections/)

# Arrays

## What are arrays for?

An *array* is much like a list of items. We typically use arrays to group related or similarly shaped sets of data.

---

## Creating an array

We can create an `array` in two ways, using the literal syntax and through the `Array()` constructor. Let's look at how each of these work.

```javascript
// Create an empty array using the literal syntax.
let literalArray = [];

// Create an empty array using the constructor syntax.
// This is less common and the literal style is typically preferred.
let constructorArray = new Array();
```

We can also create arrays with data already in them.

```javascript
// Create an array using the literal syntax.
let duckArray = ['Daffy', 'Donald', 'Howard'];

// Create an array using the constructor syntax.
let ledZep = new Array('Jimmy Page', 'Robert Plant', 'John Paul Jones', 'John Bonham');
```

#### Exercise Break!

> 1. Create an array named `colors` with several colors in it.
> 1. What sorts of things do you think are appropriate for arrays?

---

## How big was it again?

Just like with strings, we can access the `length` property of an array to find how how many elements the array contains. For example we know that the `duckArray` has three elements:

```javascript
duckArray.length;
// 3
```

---

## Accessing elements of an array

Each 'thing' in an array is called an *element*. Each element in an array can be found at its specific *index*. The first element in an array is located at the index 0. We access array elements using square brackets `[` and `]`.

```javascript
// Access the first array element from ledZep.
console.log(ledZep[0]); // 'Jimmy Page'

// Access the 3rd element of the ledZep array.
console.log(ledZep[2]); // 'John Paul Jones'
```

The value inside the square brackets can be an expression, meaning we can substitute a static value for anything that evaluates to a value, be it a variable, some math, even invoking a function that returns a value.

```javascript
// Access the last element of the ledZep array
let lastIndex = ledZep.length - 1;
console.log(ledZep[lastIndex]); // 'John Bonham'

// Access each element of the ledZep array in a loop
for(let i = 0; i < ledZep.length; i++) {
    console.log(ledZep[i]);
}
// 'Jimmy Page'
// 'Robert Plant'
// 'John Paul Jones'
// 'John Bonham'
```

#### Exercise Break!

> 1. Create an array named after your favorite band with each band member as an element of the array. console log the size of the array and each individual element.

---

## Adding elements to an array

JavaScript provides several methods we can call to add elements to an array. Any time an item is added or removed from an array, the whole array is reindexed, that is, each element is reassigned its place in the array.

To add an element to the end or beginning of an array, we can use the `push()` and `unshift()` methods. Let's check it out now.

```javascript
// create an array named dunderMifflin with 'Pam' in it.
let dunderMifflin = ['Pam'];
// Add 'Michael' to the beginning of the array.
dunderMifflin.unshift('Michael');
// Add 'Creed' to the end.
dunderMifflin.push('Creed');

console.log(dunderMifflin);
// ["Michael", "Pam", "Creed"]
```

We can also add elements in the middle of an array with the `splice` method. [Let's look at how it works](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/splice). Now, let's add some more elements to the `dunderMifflin` array.

```javascript
console.log(dunderMifflin); // What's in dunderMifflin
// ["Michael", "Pam", "Creed"]

dunderMifflin.splice(2, 0, 'Jim');

console.log(dunderMifflin); // Now, what's in dunderMifflin
// ["Michael","Pam","Jim","Creed"]
```

#### Exercise Break!

> Take the array with your favorite band, then add 'Rob Thomas' after the first element and 'Carlos Santana' *before* the last element. Log the output.

---

## Deleting elements from an array

We can use the `splice` method to remove array elements. You should recall that the second argument in the `splice` method is the number of elements we want to delete. Let's build upon the `dunderMifflin` examples above by removing 'Pam'.

```javascript
...
console.log(dunderMifflin); // Now, what's in dunderMifflin
// ["Michael","Pam","Jim","Creed"]
dunderMifflin.splice(1, 1);
console.log(dunderMifflin);
// ["Michael","Jim","Creed"]
```

#### Exercise Break!

> Let's go back to your band array. Rob Thomas doesn't belong in any band, remove him from the array and log the output.
>
> **Exercise 2**,
> 
> 1. Create a new, empty array.
> 1. Add to it your three favorite foods.
> 1. Log the array to your console.
> 1. Log the size of the array to your console.
> 1. Before the first element, add 'Tamales'.
> 1. After the last element, add 'Calzones'.
> 1. Anywhere in the middle, add 'Tres Leches'.
> 1. Log the array to your console.
> 1. Remove all your original favorites, log your new list of favorites to the console.
> 1. Comment all the code in this exercise.

# Maps

## What are maps for?

A `Map` is a simple collection of key/value pairs, which sounds much like an object. There are some important differences.

1. An `object` can inherit properties and methods from other `objects`. (We'll cover methods and inheritance soon.)
2. The keys in an `object` are always strings, whereas the keys of a `Map` can be anything.
3. `Map`s  have the length property, making it easy to find out how many items there are.
4. The keys of a `Map` are iterated in order, whereas the keys of an `object` may not be. (We'll cover iteration soon.)

---

## Creating an map

Unlike nearly everything we've seen so far, there is only one way to create a `Map`.

```javascript
const policeCodes = new Map();
```

We can create a `Map` with some of the key/value pairs already inserted:

```javascript
const codeArray = [
    ['11-24', 'Abandoned vehicle'],
    ['11-25', 'Traffic hazard'],
    ['11-26', 'Abandoned bicycle'],
    ['11-51', 'Escort'],
    ['11-52', 'Funeral detail'],
    ['11-54', 'Suspicious vehicle'],
    ['11-55', 'Officer being followed by auto'],
    ['11-85', 'Tow truck required'],
    ['11-94', 'Pedestrian stop'],
    ['11-95', 'Routine traffic stop']
];
const policeCodes = new Map(codeArray);
```

#### Exercise Break!

> What's going on with `codeArray`?

---

## Its not the size of the `Map`

Array and strings have the `length` property to tell us how big they are. `Map`s also have a `length`, however it is always 0. `Map`s use the `size` property to tell us how many key/value pairs it contains.

```javascript
console.log(policeCodes.size);
// 10
```

---

## Adding keys to a map

We can add keys to a map by using the `set` method and passing the key and value as arguments.

```javascript
policeCodes.set('5150', 'Mental case');
policeCodes.set('187', 'Murder');

console.log(policeCodes.size);
// 12
```

#### Exercise Break!

> Create a new `Map` based on the list of [Highest-grossing films adjusted for inflation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_highest-grossing_films#Highest-grossing_films_adjusted_for_inflation), where the keys are the year the movie was released and the value is the title of the movie.

---

## Accessing keys of a map

Retrieving keys from a `Map` is simple as well.

```javascript
console.log(policeCodes.get('5150'));
// 'Mental case'
console.log(policeCodes.get('187'));
// 'Murder'
```

---

## Deleting keys from a map

Deleting keys from a `Map` only requires the `delete` method.

```javascript
policeCodes.delete('5150');
console.log(policeCodes.size);
// 11

console.log(policeCodes.get('5150'));
// undefined
```

We can also empty the whole `Map`.

```javascript
policeCodes.clear();

console.log(policeCodes.size);
// 0
```

# Sets

## What are sets for?

New in ES6, `Set`s are collections of values similar to arrays except that their values are always unique. You should use `Set`s whenever you want a collection of values that won't repeat.

---

## Creating a set

Similar to `Map`s, `Set`s require the use of the `new` keyword.

```javascript
const names = new Set();
```

---

## Adding elements to a set

When we add elements to a `Set` they are added at the end and we can do this with the `add()` method.

```javascript
names.add('Rob'); // Add Rob
console.log(names);
// ["Rob"]

names.add('Philbert'); // Add Philbert
console.log(names);
// ["Rob", "Philbert"]

names.add('Rob'); // Add Rob again.
console.log(names);
// ["Rob", "Philbert"]
```

---

## Accessing elements of a set

`Set`s do not provide a way to get values out because there would be no utility to that. However, we *can* find out if a `Set` has a a value:

```javascript
names.has('Rob');
// true

names.has('Marilyn');
// false
```

---

## Deleting elements from a set

Finally, we may remove items from a `Set` using the `delete()` method.

```javascript
names.delete('Rob');

names.has('Rob');
// false
```

#### Exercise Break!

> Create a new Set and add the names of your immediate family members. Log the set to your console.

---

## Converting to arrays

When we have `Map`s, '`Set`s, or other array-like collections, we often want to do array things, such as sorting and filtering. We'll start by making a new set from an array:


```javascript
const nameSet = new Set(['Bill', 'Ted', 'Grim Reaper']); // Create a new Set with default array data.

const nameArray = Array.from(nameSet);
```

#### Exercise Break!

> 1. Convert the Map you created above into an array.
> 1. Convert the Set you created above into an array.
> 1. Log the two new arrays to your console, and compare them, what do you see?

# Objects

## What are objects for?

We learned that *array*s are lists of data. JavaScript `object`s are similar, except that they are more structured. Rather than having *elements* that are numerically indexed, an *object* contains pairs of keys or more precisely, *properties* and *values*. We typically use `object`s to describe 'things'.

---

## Creating an object

Just like everything else we've seen so far, `object`s can be created in two ways. The most common way, an *object literal* is created using curly braces '{' and '}'.

```javascript
const movie = {};
```

Here, we've created an empty movie, it exists, but there is nothing interesting about it, like *50 Shades of Grey*. We may also use the `object` constructor syntax, but there isn't often a reason to.

```javascript
const person = new Object();
```

Finally, we can create an `object` with properties.

```javascript
const album = {
    artist: 'Prince',
    available: true,
    releaseYear: 1984,
    title: 'Purple Rain',
    trackList: [
        "Let's Go Crazy",
        "Take Me with U",
        "The Beautiful Ones",
        "Computer Blue",
        "Darling Nikki",
        "When Doves Cry",
        "I Would Die 4 U",
        "Baby I'm a Star",
        "Purple Rain",
    ],
};
```

*Instructor will take a brief aside here to cover the subject of comma dangling.*

---

## Assigning and accessing properties in an object

As you noticed above, object *properties* can be just about anything. In fact, the properties of an object function just like variables and can contain anything a variable can contain.

We can assign properties to an object by using *dot syntax* `.`, and access the properties in the same manner. Let's add more properties to the `album` object and then retrieve some.

```javascript
// Starting with the album object above.
album.label = 'Warner Bros.';
album.genre = ['R&B', 'rock', 'funk', 'pop', 'new wave', 'soul'];

console.log(album.artist);
// "Prince"
console.log(album.releaseYear);
// 1984
console.log(album.trackList[0]);
// "Let's Go Crazy"

if (album.available) {
    console.log('You can buy the album.');
}
// "You can buy the album."
```

#### Exercise Break!

> 1. In the `album` object, why did we access `album.trackList` the way we did?
> 2. Starting with the empty `movie` object above, add some properties. At at least one each of properties that contain strings, booleans, numbers, and arrays.
> 3. Write an `if..else` statement that console logs something depending on the boolean value in your movie object.

---

## Deleting properties from an object

Finally, we can remove properties from an object by using the `delete` operator.

```javascript
// Starting with the album object above.
delete album.label;

console.log(album.label);
// undefined
```

# Assessment

1. Create an array of four or five of your hobbies
    - Add to it "Bocce Ball" to the end
    - Remove the first element
    - Console log the first, third and last elements
2. Create an object that describes your favorite movie, make sure to include properties that have a string, a number, a boolean, and an array as values.
3. Create a Map with all 50 states and their 2-letter code as keys, for example, the value 'Texas' would have the key 'TX'. Either create an empty Map and add all 50 states, or create an array and insert it into a map.
4. Create a set with your 10 favorite names for dogs (or cats), determine if the name 'Rob' is in that set.
