# Loops and Iteration

**Goal:** In this lesson, we will learn about iteration and how to loop through different types of data.

# Pre-class Reading

* [for](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/for)
* [while](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/while)
* [for..of](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/for...of)
* [Iterables and iterators in ECMAScript 6](http://www.2ality.com/2015/02/es6-iteration.html)

Create a new folder called *loops* and files called *index.html* and *loops.js* and set up new *package.json*, *gulpfile.js*, and *.eslintrc.

---

When we have a collection of data, possibly in the form of an array, an object, a Map or, a Set, we often want to do something with *each* element. In many of the examples that follow, we will just `console.log()` individual elements, however we could easily be dynamically inserting elements into a web page or doing some other thing that I cannot currently think of.

JavaScript has the concept of arrays and array-like constructs. We've already seen arrays, but array-likes are probably new to you. If we were to use `document.querySelectorAll()` to collect several web page or more correctly, *DOM*, elements, we'd get back an array-like collection. We can convert those to actual arrays, and we'll see how to do that in a later lesson.

I will start this lesson by creating an array that I'll use in the code examples. I'll have you create your own shortly.

```javascript
let favoriteTVShows = [
    'Adventure Time',
    'Better Call Saul',
    'Bob\'s Burgers',
    'King of the Hill',
    'Parks and Recreation',
    'Portlandia',
    'Regular Show',
    'Sarah & Duck',
    'Steven Universe',
    'The Office',
    'Wet Hot American Summer: First Day of Camp',
];
```

## For

A `for` statement is the most explicitly constructed sort of loop. In a `for` loop, we have to specifically define:

- the *initial state*
- the *condition* that must remain true to continue to run the loop
- the *final expression* that will be evaluated after everything else in the loop

as arguments in the `for` loop statement. Let's look at a loop,

```javascript
for(let i = 1; i < 11; i++) {
    console.log(i);
}
// 1
// 2
// 3
// 4
// 5
// 6
// 7
// 8
// 9
// 10
```

In this example, we want to simply output the numbers from 1 to 10, so we set the initial value `i` to 1. Then, we state that as long as `i` is less than 11, the loop will continue to run. Finally, after we've done everything in the loop (in this case, just `console.log()`), we increment `i`.

Now, let's look at a slightly more complicated example, the goal of this loop is to output each element in my `favoriteTVShows` array.

```javascript
for(let i = 0; i < favoriteTVShows.length; i++) {
    console.log(favoriteTVShows[i]);
}
```

#### Exercise Break!

> 1. Based on what you know about `for` loops, let's explain what is happening in this loop.
> 1. Create a loop that counts down from 10 to 0, inclusive.
> 1. Create your own array of data and log each item within.
> 1. Using the same array, loop through the data *backwards* and log each item.

## While

While (*heh*) the `for` loop requires we define all the parameters as arguments, a `while` loop only requires the truth condition. Let's take a look:

```javascript
let i = 1;

while(i < 11) {
    console.log(i);
    i++;
}
```

I can do the same with my personal array from above:

```javascript
let i = 0;

while(i < favoriteTVShows.length) {
    console.log(favoriteTVShows[i]);
    i++;
}
```

#### Exercise Break!

> 1. Let's explain the last `while` loop, line by line.
> 1. Use a `while` loop to iterate your array, logging each individual element.
> 1. Use a `while` loop to iterate from 10 to 0 backwards.
> 1. Use a `while` loop to iterate your array backwards.
> 1. Compare `for` loops with `while` loops, which do you think is easier to read?

## For..of

ES6 provides us a new way to iterate any iterable object, such as arrays, sets, and maps, `for..of`. Let's iterate through our favorite TV shows.

```javascript
for (let show of favoriteTVShows) {
    console.log(show);
}
```

#### Exercise Break!

> 1. Use a `for..of` loop to iterate your array, logging each individual element.
> 1. Compare `for..of` loops with the `for` and `while` loops, which do you think is easier to read?
> 1. `for..of` loops only iterate in one direction, can you think of a way to effectively iterate from 10 to 0 backwards?

# JSON

JSON (pronounced "Jason"), which is an acronym for JavaScript Object Notation. It is used as a data storage and communication format on the internet.

JSON is much like JavaScript objects with a few exceptions.

1. All property names must be surrounded by double quotes
1. Only simple data expressions are allowed, meaning no function calls, variables, or anything that involves actual computation
1. No comments in JSON

Let's look at an example of JSON

```javascript
const favoriteMovies = [
    {"title": "The Abyss", "genre": "Sci-Fi", "release_date": 1989, "director": "James Cameron"},
    {"title": "Alien", "genre": "Sci-Fi", "release_date": 1979, "director": "Ridley Scott"},
    {"title": "Aliens", "genre": "Sci-Fi", "release_date": 1986, "director": "James Cameron"},
    {"title": "Field of Dreams", "genre": "Drama", "release_date": 1989, "director": "Phil Alden Robinson"},
    {"title": "The Incredibles", "genre": "Action", "release_date": 2004, "director": "Brad Bird"},
    {"title": "Sphere", "genre": "Sci-Fi", "release_date": 1998, "director": "Barry Levinson"}
];
```

JSON has a few built in methods that we should look at, `JSON.stringify` and `JSON.parse`.

```javascript
const jsonString = JSON.stringify({"title": "Alien", "genre": "Sci-Fi", "release_date": 1979, "director": "Ridley Scott"});
console.log(jsonString);
// {"title":"Alien","genre":"Sci-Fi","release_date":1979,"director":"Ridley Scott"}

console.log(JSON.parse(jsonString).title);
// Alien
```

Let's find out how long the movie list is.

```javascript
console.log(favoriteMovies.length);
// 6
```

#### Exercise Break!

> 1. Create your own JSON object describing your favorite movies, include at least the title, genre, release_date, and director
> 1. Get the values of the properties from one of the elements in your JSON object. Keep in mind that JSON is made mostly from objects, arrays, strings, and numbers, so you can use a combination of the object dot notation and the array index accessors.

# Arrays, revisited

*Time allowing, the instructor will cover the following methods, providing examples and allowing exercise time for each:*

- Nested array if it hasn't come up naturally already.
- `String.split()`
- `Array.join()`
- `Array.reverse()`
- `Array.sort()`

# Assessment

Use the following array for each of the following exercises.

```javascript
const alphabet = ['a','b','c','d','e','f','g','h','i','j','k','l','m','n','o','p','q','r','s','t','u','v','w','x','y','z'];
```

1. Write a `for` loop that iterates through the `alphabet` array and console logs each element.
1. Write a `while` loop that iterates through the `alphabet` array and console logs each element.
1. Write a `for..of` loop that iterates through the `alphabet` array and console logs each element.
