# Functions

**Goal:** In this lesson, we will learn about functions, how to create and call them. We'll also learn about anonymous functions and the new ES6 style fat arrow functions. Finally, we will learn about some important array methods, `forEach`, `map`, `filter`, and `reduce`.

# Pre-class Preparations

* [functions](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/function)
* [rest parameters](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Functions/rest_parameters)
* [Arrow functions](https://hacks.mozilla.org/2015/06/es6-in-depth-arrow-functions/)
* [filter](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/filter)
* [map](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/map)
* [reduce](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/reduce)

Create a new folder called *functions* and files called *index.html* and *functions.js* and set up new *package.json*, *gulpfile.js*, and *.eslintrc.

# Creating Functions

Now that we have seen `boolean`s, `string`s, `number`s, `array`s, `object`s, `Map`s and `Set`s, we need to figure out a way to organize and make our code reusable. Functions provide us a way to reuse code. This is a principle called *DRY*, or *Don't Repeat Yourself*. If you find yourself writing something, and writing it again, its a good candidate for being wrapped in a function.

We define functions with the `function` keyword and by giving the function a name. Before we start creating functions, we need to know what names we *cannot* use.

## Reserved Words

JavaScript has many words we cannot use for function names, these words include:

> abstract, await, async, boolean, break, byte, case, catch, char, class, const, continue, debugger, default, delete, do, double, else, enum, export, extends, final, finally, float, for, function, goto, if, implements, import, in, instanceof, int, interface, let, long, native, new, package, private, protected, public, return, short, static, super, switch, synchronized, this, throw, transient, try, typeof, var, void, volatile, while, with, yield

## Function declarations

Let's now look at how a function is defined using the declarative style.

```javascript
function welcome() {}
```

Typically, we create a function by using the `function` keyword and giving it a name.

## Function variables

We can also define a function as a variable.

```javascript
let welcome = function() {};
```

Here, we create a variable containing an anonymous function. Later, we'll look at how to use anonymous functions without assigning it to a variable.

## Hoisting

We've seen two ways to define functions, so now let's talk about whats different about them. When a JavaScript program is run, or rather, before its run, the whole file is parsed and some things are kept in memory while the code is parsed again. *The preceding sentence is not actually how it works, but accurately describes the result*. The primary thing kept in memory are functions, only those defined with the declarative style, not function variables. This means we can call a function on line 1 of a program that isn't actually defined until later in the program.

## Invoking functions

We can *call* or *invoke* a function by using its name and and a pair of parentheses.

```javascript
// Define a function
functions welcome() {
    console.log('Welcome to JavaScript.');
}

// Call that function
welcome(); // Welcome to JavaScript.
```

#### Exercise Break!

> 1. Write a function called `loopToTen` that `console.log`s all the numbers from 1 to 10.

## Arguments

Functions accept 0 or more *arguments* within the parentheses. Arguments can be likened to variables that are passed into the function to be used. They can be thought of as settings that the function accepts to modify its behavior.

```javascript
function log(message) {
    console.log(message);
}

log('Hello, I am in your console.'); // Hello, I am in your console.
log('This is weird, let me out.'); // This is weird, let me out.
```

In this preceding example, the function `log` accepts one argument and that argument is passed to `console.log`. Its often a good idea to define variables within a function from arguments, for example if the function expects a number, we should make sure that the value being used within is one.

```javascript
function addFour(value) {
    let value = Number(value); // Cast `value` as a number, just in case.

    return value + 4;
}

addFour(10);
addFour("10");
```

#### Exercise Break!

> 1. What is result of the two function calls above?
> 1. What would the result of the two function calls above be if we didn't convert `value` to a number?

Functions can of course accept more than one arguments.

```javascript
function add(number1, number2) {
    let number1 = Number(number1);
    let number2 = Number(number2);

    console.log(number1 + number2);
}

add(5, 10); // 15
```

Often, we want arguments to be optional and to allow for this, we have to provide *argument default*s. In JavaScript through version 5, we could not define default values when we register arguments for a function, so we had to define values within the function if the values were empty (undefined).

```javascript
// This whole function is <=ES5 style
function defaultValues(arg1, arg2) {
    var arg1 = arg1 || 35;
    var arg2 = arg2 || 100;

    console.log(arg1, arg2);
}
```

*Instructor will give a few examples of this function in action and discuss the drawbacks of this method.*

ES6 brought us an easier way to set default values in a function.

```javascript
function betterDefaultValues(arg1 = 35, arg2 = 100) {
    console.log(arg1, arg2);
}
```

Way better. Let's look at how babel compiles this.

#### Exercise Break!

> 1. Write a function named `customLoop` that accepts two arguments called `start` and `end`. This function should loop starting with `start` and ending with `end`, inclusive.

## The rest parameter

Let's return to the idea of adding up numbers. The `add` function above accepts 2 arguments that are added together. What do we do if we want to add three arguments? Or four? Or if we don't know how many we want? JavaScript provides us the *rest parameter* which accepts any number of values and passes along an array.

```javascript
function logEach(...values) {
    for(value in values) {
        console.log(value);
    }
}

logEach(1, 2, 3, 4, 5);
// 1
// 2
// 3
// 4
// 5
```

#### Exercise Break!

> 1. Write a function that multiplies two numbers and logs the result to the console.
> 2. Write a function that multiplies many numbers and logs the result to the console.

# Return

Some functions include a `return` statement, others don't. If arguments are how we get values into functions, the `return` statement is how we get them back out. What if we rewrote the `add` function from above to `return` the value instead of `console.log` it?

```javascript
function add(number1, number2) {
    let number1 = Number(number1);
    let number2 = Number(number2);

     return number1 + number2;
}

console.log(add(5, 10)); // 15
```

#### Exercise Break!

> 1. Write a function that accepts one or more strings and concatenates them all. The function should return the value.

# Scope

Let's revisit scope now. We previously touched on how some types of variables defined in either the global or a local scope determines their availability.

Functions have scope too. We can put functions inside of other functions and they are protected by the function just like a variable.

```javascript
function outerFunction() {
    function innerFunction() {
        console.log('The inner function ran');
    }
}

outerFunction();
```

In this case, the inner function doesn't get called, so the `console.log` doesn't run.

#### Exercise Break!

> 1. How can we modify the `outerFunction` to run the `console.log`?

# Anonymous Functions

Anonymous functions are functions that don't have a named assigned to them. We typically use anonymous functions as callback functions or as functions that are used as an argument in another function. Let's look at how jQuery uses callbacks and anonymous functions:

```javascript
$('.btn').click(function(event) {
    event.preventDefault();

    openModalWindow();
});
```

Here, jQuery looks for an HTML element with a class of '.btn' and any time one is clicked with a mouse pointer, two things happen. First, the standard result of the click event is prevented (so say a form won't submit), then , another function called `openModalWindow()` is called.

Notice that there is a `function` as the argument inside the `click` method. That inner function is the anonymous function. For comparison, we could rewrite this example without the anonymous function.

```javascript
$('.btn').click(handleButtonClick(event));

function handleButtonClick(event) {
    event.preventDefault();

    openModalWindow();
}
```

In fact, *not* using anonymous functions is seen as a best practice, typically, named functions should be used whenever possible.

# IIFEs

We can use *immediately-invoked function expression* or *IIFE*s to run an anonymous function as soon as a program reaches it. The way it works is by creating an expression (in parentheses), filling it with a function, and then calling that expression like a function:

```javascript
(function() {
    // The code in here will execute immediately.
})();
```

IIFEs are currently a popular way to wrap up code to prevent pollution of the global namespace. This pattern is very common in website development, and a little less so in application development.

# Fat Arrow Functions

In ES6, we have moved away from anonymous functions and in to *fat arrow* functions. fat arrow functions work very much like anonymous functions. Let's look at how a fat arrow function compares to an anonymous function.

```javascript
// Anonymous function
function() {};

// Fat arrow
() => {}
```

Following is an example of an IIFE with a fat arrow function instead of an anonymous function.

```javascript
(() => {
    // The code in here will execute immediately.
})();
```

We can also use fat arrow functions in place of callback functions, like in the jQuery example.

```javascript
$('.btn').click(event => {
    event.preventDefault();

    openModalWindow();
});
```

There is one important difference between an anonymous function and the fat arrow, that being how each handles `this`. In short, fat arrows inherit `this` from the scope they are contained within while anonymous functions own their own `this`. We'll cover this subject more when we discuss *class*es.

# Array methods

Now that we've got a good grasp of functions, let's look at how arrays use functions to iterate and filter data.

For the following examples, we are going to use the following sample data.

```javascript
const favoriteMovies = [
    {"title": "The Abyss", "genre": "Sci-Fi", "release_date": 1989, "director": "James Cameron"},
    {"title": "Alien", "genre": "Sci-Fi", "release_date": 1979, "director": "Ridley Scott"},
    {"title": "Aliens", "genre": "Sci-Fi", "release_date": 1986, "director": "James Cameron"},
    {"title": "Field of Dreams", "genre": "Drama", "release_date": 1989, "director": "Phil Alden Robinson"},
    {"title": "The Incredibles", "genre": "Action", "release_date": 2004, "director": "Brad Bird"},
    {"title": "Sphere", "genre": "Sci-Fi", "release_date": 1998, "director": "Barry Levinson"}
];
```

## forEach

`forEach` is an array method that lets us iterate using a function. The callback function in the `forEach` method accepts an argument that represent an single element from the array and then may then do *something* those items.

```javascript
favoriteMovies.forEach(movie => console.log(movie.title));
```

#### Exercise Break!

> 1. Use a `forEach` loop to iterate your array, logging each individual element.
> 1. Compare `forEach` loops with the `for`, `while`, and `for..of` loops, which do you think is easier to read?
> 1. `forEach` loops also only iterate in one direction, can you think of or find a way to effectively iterate the array `[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]` backwards?

---

## Filtering Arrays with `filter`

The `filter` method, unsurprisingly, allows us to filter array data. The callback function in this method accepts an argument that represents a single element in the array. The callback function should return a boolean, usually expressed as some sort of expression. When the function returns `true`, `filter` adds that single element to what will be returned. Let's look at how this works.

```javascript
const scifiMovies = favoriteMovies.filter(movie => movie.genre === 'Sci-Fi');
```

#### Exercise Break!

> 1. Using your `favoriteMovies` data, filter and save the movies that were released before the year 2000. Log the titles of those movies.

---

## Filtering Arrays with `map`

The `map` method iterates through an array and produces a new collection with the results of a function called within. Let's say we want to know which movies within my `favoriteMovies` array were directed by James Cameron. We'll iterate through the array and add the resulting movies to a new set.

```javascript
const jamesCMovies = new Set();

favoriteMovies.map(movie => {
    if (movie.director === 'James Cameron') {
        jamesCMovies.add(movie.title);
    }
});

console.log(jamesCMovies); // ["The Abyss","Aliens"]
```

We can also use `map` to quickly do something to every element in an array. For example, we'll write a function that squares a number, then we'll call that function on several numbers in an array.

```javascript
const numbers = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10];

function square(number) {
    return number ** 2;
}

const numbersSquared = numbers.map(square);

console.log(numbersSquared);
```

#### Exercise Break!

> 1. Using `map`, create an array of movies titles that are in the genre "Comedy".

---

## Filtering Arrays with `reduce`

The `reduce` array method iterates an array and compares two elements, returning one, comparing it to the next element, and on until only a single value remains. Returning to my favorite movies, we can reduce the movie array to the one that was produced last.

```javascript
const newestMovie = favoriteMovies.reduce((previous, current) => {
  if (current.release_date > previous.release_date) {
    return current;
  }

  return previous;
});

console.log(newestMovie.title); // The Incredibles
```

In this example, we must return the whole movie object so that the comparisons work every time.

---

# Assessment

1. Write a function named `createArray` that accepts an argument named `length` and returns an array of numbers from 0 to `length`-1. For example, `createArray(10)` should return `[0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9]`.
1. Use `filter` to determine which movies in your favorite movies were released *after* 1990. Log the titles of those movies.
1. Use `map` to iterate the array `[1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10]` and add 10 to each element.
1. Write a function that accepts an array and uses `reduce` to find and return the average of the numbers in the array.
