# Classes

**Goal:** In this lesson, we will learn about Classes. We'll also look at JavaScript modules, and how functions, classes, and modules are used to organize code in modern JavaScript.

# Pre-class Preparations

- [The Secret Life of Objects](http://eloquentjavascript.net/06_object.html)
- [Classes in ECMAScript 6](http://www.2ality.com/2015/02/es6-classes-final.html)
- [ECMAScript 6 modules](http://exploringjs.com/es6/ch_modules.html)

# What are Classes

Let's take a moment to think about the automobile. Automobiles all share many features and many automobiles have unique features. Automobiles as a group share a common blueprint. *Class*es serve as a way to define that blueprint in a programming language. Classes provide a way to template and combine all the code needed to create or do a thing. In most of the following examples, we'll use Automobiles as that "thing".

# Before ES6 (The Dark Ages)

Before ES6 came along, vanilla JavaScript used functions and prototypes to construct classes. This is very different from nearly every other language that used the `class` keyword to define classes. There were libraries such as *CoffeeScript* that implemented a way to write classes, but we won't dive into that.

Let's look at how classes used to be set up.

## Constructors

The *constructor* is a function called when a new instance of a class is created. Let's look at how a constructor works pre-ES6.

```javascript
// This is all in the pre-ES6 syntax style
function Automobile(make, model, color) {
    this.make = make;
    this.model = model;
    this.color = color;
}
```

"Wait, Rob", I hear you saying, "that's just a function". Looks like it. You will notice we pass several arguments to that function and inside, we use `this` along with what looks much like an object's dot syntax. An instance of a class is an object and has properties just like an object. `this` references the specific instance of a class. Let's explore what that means and how to call constructors.

```javascript
var Miata = new Automobile('Mazda', 'Miata', 'Flame Red');
var Mustang = new Automobile('Ford', 'Mustang', 'Ice Blue');
```

Above, both the Miata and the Mustang are instances of the `Automobile` class. In the case of the Miata, `this` is the Miata, and in the case of the Mustang, `this` is the Mustang. However, `this` is only important within a class. Once an instance of a class is created, we can access its properties just like those of a normal class.

```javascript
console.log(Miata.color);
// Flame Red

console.log(Mustang.make);
// Ford
```

#### Exercise Break!

> 1. Create your own `Automobile` constructor and give it some properties that are common to all automobiles.
> 1. Create two cars using your `Automobile` class, setting the appropriate properties.
> 1. For each of your cars, print a few of the properties.

## Methods

Classes can have functions, however we call them *methods*. We can add methods to a constructor by extending its `prototype`. `prototype` is an object that all functions contain. Any object that is an instance of a function also has the same `prototype`. A class' prototype includes its constructor. Let's look at how to add a method to a constructor.

```javascript
Automobile.prototype.start = function() {
    return 'Vroom, vroom!';
};
```

Now, with any instance of `Automobile`, we can call the `start()` method.

```javascript
Miata.start();
// "Vroom, vroom!"
```

We can also call it on `Automobile`.

```javascript
Automobile.prototype.start();
// "Vroom, vroom!"
```

#### Exercise Break!

> 1. Add a `honk` method to your `Automobile.prototype`. The method should return the sound of your car's horn as a string.

## Extending Classes

An automobile is pretty good, but motorcycles are what all the cool kids like. Motorcycles share much with automobiles, yet have several unique traits. Now that we know how to create constructors and add methods, let's make a bigger Automobile class and then make a Motorcycle class that extends it.

```javascript
function Automobile(make, model, color) {
    this.make = make;
    this.model = model;
    this.color = color;

    this._doorCount = 4;
    this._doorsLocked = true;
}

Automobile.prototype.lockUnlock = function() {
    if (this._doorsLocked) {
        this._doorsLocked = false;
        return 'Doors unlocked';
    }

    this._doorsLocked = true;
    return 'Doors locked';
};

Object.defineProperty(Automobile.prototype, 'doors', {
    get: function() {
        return 'This ' + this.make + ' ' + this.model + ' has ' + this._doorCount + ' doors';
    },
    set: function(number) {
        this._doorCount = number;
    }
});

Object.defineProperty(Automobile.prototype, 'name', {
    get: function() {
        return this.make + ' ' + this.model;
    }
});

function Motorcycle(make, model, color) {
    Automobile.call(this, make, model, color);

    delete this._doorCount;
    delete this._doorsLocked;
}

Motorcycle.prototype = Object.create(Automobile.prototype);

Motorcycle.prototype.lockUnlock = function() {
    return 'Motorcycles have no doors';
};

Object.defineProperty(Motorcycle.prototype, 'doors', {
    get: function() {
        return 'Motorcycles have 0 doors';
    }
});

var hondaCivic = new Automobile('Honda', 'Civic', 'Silver');
hondaCivic.color;
// Silver
hondaCivic.name;
// Honda Civic
hondaCivic.doors;
// This Honda Civic has 4 doors

var hondaRebel = new Motorcycle('Honda', 'Rebel', 'Black');
hondaRebel.color;
// Black
hondaRebel.name;
// Honda Rebel
hondaRebel.doors;
// Motorcycles have 0 doors
```

## Getters and setters

In JavaScript, *getters* and *setters*, or collectively, *accessors*, provide for us a way to control access to or output of properties in an object or class. Let's look at how this works.

```javascript
const MathObject = {
    get x() {
        return _x ** 2;
    },
    set x(value) {
        _x = value;
    },
};
```

If we run this bit of code through gulp, we can set `MathObject.x = 10`. What will `MathObject.x` return when we call it?

We can also use getters to make properties read-only.

```javascript
const DavidBowie = {
    get alias() {
        return 'Ziggy Stardust';
    }
};

DavidBowie.alias = 'Diamond Dog';
// "Diamond Dog"

DavidBowie.alias;
// "Ziggy Stardust"
```

*Instructor can optionally cover the following topics:*

- Properties: public and private and how conventions are used to convey which is which.
- `Object.defineProperty`
- `Function.prototype.call()`
- Exploring objects

#### Exercise Break!

> 1. Create a new class called `Truck` that extends `Automobile`. Give `Truck` methods and properties appropriate to a truck.

# ES6 and Beyond (The Age of Enlightenment)

Now, we can use Class constructors just like pretty much every other programming language out there.

*I recommend coding ES6 Classes in a file separate from ES5 classes since we are building an automobile in both examples.*

## Constructors

In ES6, we define classes using the `class` keyword and constructors with a `constructor` function.

```javascript
class Automobile
{
    constructor(make, model, color)
    {
        this.make = make;
        this.model = model;
        this.color = color;
    }
}

let fiat = new Automobile('Fiat', '500c', 'Black');

console.log(fiat.model);
// 500c
```

The constructor function is called automagically when a `new` instance of that  constructor's class is created.

#### Exercise Break!

> 1. Create your own `Automobile` class and give it some properties that are common to all automobiles.
> 1. Create two cars using your `Automobile` class, setting the appropriate properties.
> 1. For each of your cars, print a few of the properties.

## Methods

Methods in ES6 are part of the class they belong to, instead of being added to a function's `prototype`. Let's look at how to add the `lockUnlock` method to the Automobile class.

```javascript
class Automobile
{
    constructor(make, model, color)
    {
        this.make = make;
        this.model = model;
        this.color = color;

        this._doorsLocked = true;
    }

    lockUnlock() {
        if (this._doorsLocked) {
            this._doorsLocked = false;
            return 'Doors unlocked';
        }

        this._doorsLocked = true;
        return 'Doors locked';
    }
}
```

The `lockUnlock()` method is added to the `Automobile` class without a function keyword.

#### Exercise Break!

> 1. Add a `honk` method to your `Automobile.prototype`. The method should return the sound of your car's horn as a string.

## Extending Classes

In old-style JavaScript, we have to extend a function's prototype to extend a class. In ES6, we just use the `extends` keyword.

```javascript
class Motorcycle extends Automobile
{
    constructor(make, model, color)
    {
        super(make, model, color);
    }
}
```

In the constructor, we use the `super` keyword to call the parent classes constructor. We can also use the `super` keyword to call or inherit other methods from a parent class. For example, the Motorcycle class could inherit the `lockUnlock` from Automobile like this:

```javascript
class Motorcycle extends Automobile
{
    constructor(make, model, color) { super(make, model, color); } // compressed the constructor to save room

    lockUnlock()
    {
        super.lockUnlock();
    }
}
```

Although we shouldn't do that this time, it doesn't make sense for a Motorcycle to have unlockable doors.

#### Exercise Break!

> 1. Create a new class called `Truck` that extends `Automobile`. Give `Truck` methods and properties appropriate to a truck.

# Modules

*None of the code in this section will work without some modifications to the gulpfile and .eslintrc that I haven't done yet.*

*TODO: Get this code working.*

With classes, we get to the point in JavaScript where everything in a single file should be as tightly related as possible. What I mean is that if we intend to create a class that does anything, say, describe all the features and functionality of a Database, we of course create an `Database` class. That class will go into a file called *Database.js*. Therefore, the only thing in *Database.js* is the class `Database`. The goal then is to pull the `Database` class in to another file wherever it is needed.

To make a class useful to other files, we need to export it. Let's look at what that looks like:

```javascript
// Database.js
export default class Database
{
    // Database constructor, methods, and properties in here
    select(id)
    {
        // some code here queries a database and returns a record
    }
}
```

So, we use the `export` keyword to determine some code will be used in other files. It also happens that many things can be exported, classes, functions, and even variables can be exported too.

Then, in another file, we can import the `Database` class and use it.

```javascript
import Database from 'Database';

// Sample class that might use a Database connection
class Posts
{
    getPost(id)
    {
        const post = Database.select(id);
    }
}
```

The whole point of this is two-fold, depending on the complexity. First, if each file always contains code that is related, then it is relatively easy to find code that we need to use, or debug, or add functionality to. We can always look for database code in the database file, or the user code in a user file, etc. Secondly, accessing something like a database library as a module allows the program to access things such as databases in a way that doesn't care what sort of database it is accessing. Meaning, the database can connect to MongoDB, Mysql, or something totally different and the Posts class won't know the difference.

# Assessment

Create a class named `Shape` that accepts a `height` and `width` properties. Create a `Square` class that extends `Shape` and has `area` and `perimeter` methods. Then, create a class named `Circle` that extends `Shape` and instead has a property named `radius`. Give the `Circle` class the methods `area` and `circumference`.
