# Events

**Goal:** To learn how to watch for and act upon user events.

Often, a program will need to respond to user interaction. Maybe a form needs to submit via AJAX, or we want to track user clicks or keyboard typing. To track events, we need to know what event we want to track and where we want to that event.

Take, for example, we can add a listen to the whole page for click events.

```html
<p>Click this document to activate the handler.</p>

<script>
    window.addEventListener('click', () => alert('How can you click?!'));
</script>
```

Here, we add an event listener to the window and we pass it two arguments. First is the name of the event we want to watch for, in this case, it is 'click'. Then, we pass a function that describes what to do when the event takes place.

#### Exercise Break!

> 1. Add an event listener to the whole page that `console.log`s an inspirational message.

---

## Events and DOM nodes

When we call `addEventListener` like we did above, it is being called on the global scope, or on the `window`. Every node element has `addEventListener` available to it too.

```html
<button>Click me</button>
<p>No handler here.</p>

<script>
const button = document.querySelector('button');
button.addEventListener('click', () => alert('Button clicked.'));
</script>
```

Here, we add the `addEventListener` method to the button node. This way, clicks on the button register, but everything else doesn't.

We *could* use the `onClick` in place of `addEventListener` with "click" as an argument, however an element may only have one `onClick` attribute, whereas it can have multiple event listeners, which becomes very important when we need to support multiple browsers.

```html
<p onclick="window.alert('I am alerting you.');">Let's look at an 'onClick' attribute.</p>
```

In addition to `addEventListener`, we have `removeEventListener`, which accepts the same arguments as `addEventListener`.

```html
<button>Alert me once!</button>
<script>
const button = document.querySelector("button");
button.addEventListener("click", once);

function once() {
    alert("I am alerting you.");
    button.removeEventListener("click", once);
}
</script>
```

#### Exercise Break!

> 1. Add an event listener to a button that `console.log`s a song lyric only one time.

---

## Event objects

In the past examples, we've ignored that the function we pass to `addEventListener` accepts an argument that is an object that tells us some useful stuff about what is happening with that event.

```html
<button>Click me baby one more time</button>

<script>
const button = document.querySelector('button');

button.addEventListener('mousedown', (event) => {
    console.log(event);
    if (event.which === 1) {
        console.log('Left button');
    } else if (event.which === 2) {
        console.log('Middle button');
    } else if (event.which === 3) {
        console.log('Right button');
    }
});
</script>
```

The property values in the event object will be different based on the type of event we are watching for.

*Instructor: take some time and explore the event object.*

---

## Propagation

Event handlers registered on nodes that have children will sometimes receive events that occur on those children. If we have a button inside a paragraph, clicks on the button will register on the event handler for the paragraph, if there is one.

In the event that both the button and the paragraph have event handlers, the most specific one happens first. Clicking the button would cause the click handler for the button to fire, then the click handler for the paragraph would fire. This will continue to happen all the way up the node tree until it get to the `window`.

We can stop this by having one of the event handlers call `stopPropagation` on the event object to prevent handlers further up the node tree from receiving the event.

In the following example, we register an event on the paragraph and on the button. When the button is clicked with the left button, both handlers fire, but when right-clicked, only the button fires.

```html
<p>A paragraph with a <button>button</button>.</p>

<script>
const para = document.querySelector('p');
const button = para.querySelector('button');

para.addEventListener('mousedown', () => {
    console.log('Handler for paragraph.');
});

button.addEventListener('mousedown', (event) => {
    console.log('Handler for button.');
    console.log(event);

    if (event.which == 3) {
        event.stopPropagation();
    }
});
</script>
```

Most event objects have a `target` property that refers to the node where they originated. We can use this property to ensure that we're not accidentally handling something that propagated up from a node we do not want to handle.

We can also use the target property to cast a wide net for a specific type of event. For example, if we have a node containing a long list of buttons, it may be more convenient to register a single click handler on the outer node and have it use the target property to figure out whether a button was clicked, rather than register individual handlers on all of the buttons.

```html
<div class="buttons">
    <button>A</button>
    <button>B</button>
    <button>C</button>
</div>

<script>
querySelector('.buttons').addEventListener('click', function(event) {
    if (event.target.nodeName === 'BUTTON') {
        console.log('Clicked', event.target.textContent);
    }
});
</script>
```

#### Exercise Break!

> 1. Create three buttons, give teo the class `disabled` and one the class `active`. Use `console.log` to output a song lyric when the active button is clicked, but not when the disabled buttons are clicked.

## Default actions

Many events have a default action associated with them. If we click a link, we will be taken to the link's target, if we click a button, it might submit a form. In most cases, the registered event handler is called before the default handler. In the event we don't want the default behavior, we can call `preventDefault` on the event object.

```html
<a href='http://google.com/'>Google</a>

<script>
const link = document.querySelector('a');

link.addEventListener('click', function(event) {
    event.preventDefault();
    console.log('Not gonna go there.');
});
</script>
```

Remember, taking away a users' control is an evil thing to do that will only make people hate you, so use `preventDefault` judiciously.

## Key events

When a key on the keyboard is pressed, your browser fires a `keydown` event. When it is released, a `keyup` event fires.

```html
<p>This page turns violet when you hold the V key.</p>
<script>
addEventListener("keydown", function(event) {
    if (event.keyCode === 86) {
        document.body.style.background = "violet";
    }
});
addEventListener("keyup", function(event) {
    if (event.keyCode === 86) {
        document.body.style.background = "";
    }
});
</script>
```

`keydown` doesn't only fire when we press it. If we hold it down, it would fire repeatedly. This means we must be mindful in the event that we are counting on someone pressing and holding a button.

The `keyCode` associated with keyboard presses are determined by their ascii unicode value (see: http://www.ascii-code.com).

Modifier keys such as Shift, Ctrl, Alt, and Command generate key events just like normal keys. But when looking for key combinations, you can also find out whether these keys are held down by looking at the `shiftKey`, `ctrlKey`, `altKey`, and `metaKey` properties of keyboard and mouse events.

`keydown` is pretty ok, but there is another way to get the value of a key press, its called `keypress`! The `keypress` event fires immediately after `keydown` for keys that produce character input. The `charCode` property in the event object contains a code that can be interpreted as a Unicode character code. We can use the `String.fromCharCode` function to turn this code into an actual single-character string.

```html
<p>Focus this page and type something.</p>
<script>
addEventListener("keypress", function(event) {
    console.log(event.charCode, String.fromCharCode(event.charCode));
});
</script>

```

## Focus events

When an element gains focus, usually by clicking or tabbing into it, the browser files a `focus` event. When the element loses focus, the `blur` event fires.

Unlike the other events we've covered, `focus` and `blur` don't propagate. Handlers on the parent node do not fire when a child node gains or loses focus.

```html
<p>Name: <input type="text" data-help="Your full name"></p>
<p>Age: <input type="text" data-help="Age in years"></p>
<p id="help"></p>

<script>
const help = document.querySelector("#help");
const fields = document.querySelectorAll("input");
for (let i = 0; i < fields.length; i++) {
    fields[i].addEventListener("focus", function(event) {
        let text = event.target.getAttribute("data-help");
        help.textContent = text;
    });
    fields[i].addEventListener("blur", function(event) {
        help.textContent = "";
    });
}
</script>
```

When a user switches in or out of a tab, the `focus` and `blur` events file on the window object.

## Load event

When a page finishes loading, the `load` event fires on the window and document body objects. We typically use this to schedule the things we want ot run after the whole document is loaded.

Elements that load external files, such as images and scripts fire `load` events when the file is loaded. `load` events do not propagate.

When a user navigates away from a page or closes a tab, the `beforeunload` event fires. This is useful for preventing someone from losing unsaved work on something by closing a document. When using `beforeunload`, we don't use the `preventDefault` method like in other events. Instead, the even handle returns a string that is used as part of a confirmation message displayed to a user to confirm or deny that they are ready to leave.

# Assessment

## Censored keyboard

In the sovereign nation of *Robikistan*, no one is allowed to say that the immortal, godlike ruler, Rob, sucks. To that end, all web browsers disable the letters "C", "K", "S", and "U" from  being typed into form fields. You have been tasked with writing the program that omits input of those letters in input fields.

Make a fork of the CodePen at http://codepen.io/rhlowe/pen/MYdyvQ and add the needed code to prevent the letters from being inserted into the text field.
