# Primitives

There are six primitive data types:

* Boolean
* Null
* Number
* String
* Undefined

## Boolean

Booleans represent 'on' and 'off', or 'yes' and 'no'. Booleans come in two flavors, `true` and `false`.

### Comparisons

You often produce booleans by making comparisons.

```
3 > 2; // true
9 < 7; // false
```

You can also compare strings!

```
"Alpha" < "Beta"; // true
"Penn" > "Teller" // false

"a" > "A" // true
"HUGE" > "little" // false
```

There are also >= (greater than or equal to), <= (less than or equal to), == (equal to), != (not equal to), === (strict equal to), != (strict not equal to).

We should take a special look at (in)equality and strict (in)equality. Normal comparison only checks that the values being compared are superficially equal. Let's say we have a set of variables and wish to compare them.

```
var num = 0;
var obj = new String("0");
var str = "0";
var b = false;

num == str; // true
num == obj; // true
num == str; // true
num == b;   // true
```

On the other hand, when we make strict comparisons, we not only compare the superficial value but also the primitive type. Given the same variables defined in the last example, if we perform the same comparisons, but make them strict, we get different results.

```
num === str; // false
num === obj; // false
num === str; // false
num === b;   // false
```

When checking for inequality, it's also important to be aware of whether or not you are being strict in your comparison.

```
num != str; // false
num != obj; // false
num != str; // false
num != b;   // false

num !== str; // true
num !== obj; // true
num !== str; // true
num !== b;   // true
```

### Logical Operators

When you want to make compound or multiple boolean comparison at once, you will use logical operators. The three logical operators include *and* (&&), *or* (||), and *not* (!).

```
true && false; // false
true && true;  // true

true || false; // true
true || true; //true
false || false; // false

!true; // false
!false; // true
```

If you are familiar with the arithmetic order of operations, or PEMDAS, you'll be excited to know that comparisons and logical operators are taken into account. A full chart detailing Javascript operator precedence is available there -> (https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Operator_Precedence), but the jist of it is, logical negation happens before PEMDAS and after that, comparisons are made and finally, equality is checked.

Finally, if you compare any value against itself for equality, you will almost always get `true`, except when you compare `NaN` to itself, you get `false`.

```
NaN == NaN; // false
```

## Null

`null` means that the variable has no value. More specifically `null` means that a varaible has been given a value of 'no value'. `null` is usually interchangeable with `undefined`, however there are some caveats. We'll cover that when we talk about equality.

## Number

Numbers are numbers, but only when they aren't also strings.

```
typeof 55; // number
typeof "55"; // string
```

You can convert a string to a number using the global `parseInt()` and  `parseFloat()` methods.

```
parseInt("10"); // 10
parseFloat("55.55"); // 55.55
```

### Arithmetic

(+, -, *, /) <- Operators

In addition to the standard operators, there is `%` also known as *modulo* or *remainder*. For example, `309 % 100` returns 9.

### Special Numbers

There are 3 numbers that are technically numbers, but that don't behave like other numbers. First is `NaN`. `NaN` means 'Not a number' and is the result of trying to calculate 0 / 0 (zero divided by zero).

When you try do try to divide by and non-zero integer by 0, you get `Infinity`. If that integer is less than 0, the result is `-Infinity`. Adding or subtracting from `Infinity` still equals `Infinity`.

```
Infinity + 1; // Infinity
```

## String

A string is zero or more characters enclosed in single (') or double (") quotation marks.

* 'Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet.'
* "The quick brown fox"
* '8675309'
* "What 'cha talkin' bout, willis?"

You can concatenate strings.

```
var str1 = "The rain in Spain ";
var str2 = "falls mainly on the plains";

var str3 = str1 + str2;
console.log(str3); // "The rain in Spain falls mainly on the plains"
```

Some useful string methods include:

```
var sample = "The rain in Spain falls mainly on the plains";

sample.split(" "); // ["The", "rain", "in", "Spain", "falls", "mainly", "on", "the", "plains"]

sample.toUpperCase(); // "THE RAIN IN SPAIN FALLS MAINLY ON THE PLAINS"

sample.toLowerCase(); // "the rain in spain falls mainly on the plains"
```

## Undefined

A variable is `undefined` when it has been initialized, but not yet filled with a value.

```
console.log(bing); // Error, the variable bing doesn't exist

var bing;
console.log(bing); // The variable bing exists, but has not value
```
