# Functions

We've seen functions such as `alert()` and how to call them. Functions are great because they allow you to make reusable bits of program and having to repeat yourself is the worst.

## Defining Functions

A simple way to define a function is to just assign it to a variable. For example, the following code defines the variable `double`  to refer to a function that returns a number after it is multiplied by 2.

```javascript
var double = function(num) {
    return num * 2;
}

double(10); // 20;
```

A function is created by an expression that begins with the keyword `function`. Functions have 0 or more parameters, separated by commas, that contain statements to execute in the function body.

```javascript
var say_hi = function() {
    alert('hi!');
}

var number_glue = function(num1, num2) {
    return num1.toString() + num2.toString();
}
```

## Parameters and Scopes

The parameters within a function behave similar to variables, but their value is defined by the caller of the function, not by the function itself.

Parameters sent to a function and variables created inside of a function are local to that function. Each time we glue two numbers together using `number_glue`, the parameters num1 and num2 live for only as long as it takes return the value.

### Nested Scope

Javascript doesn't only recognize global and local scopes, but also varying degrees of locality. Take for example this silly function:

```javascript
var clutch = function() {
    var output = "";
    var one = function(length) {
        for (var count = 0; count < length; count++) {
            output += "1";
        }
    }
    var zero = function(length) {
        for (var count = 0; count < length; count++) {
            output += "0";
        }
    }

    one(1);
    zero(3);
    one(3);
    zero(1);
    one(1);
    zero(1);
    one(1);

    return output + "\nPeriodic table with a centerpiece of mind.";
}
```

Inside the `clutch` function, I define a variable named 'output'. That variable is local to `clutch`, however there are also more functions inside of `clutch` that have access to 'output' because they are also only local to `clutch`. Both functions `one` and `zero` accept parameters named 'length' and define variables named 'count', but since those variables are defined inside of functions, they are not available to each other and are treated as unique.

Right now, functions are the only constructs that create scopes. In the next version of Javascript, we will get the keyword `let`, which will allow us to make variables in any pair of curly braces "{" and "}" be local to only that block.

## Declaration Notation

So far, we have been defining variables by explicitly assigning them to variables.

```javascript
var double = function(num) {
    return num * 2;
}
```

We can shorten this a little and provide ourselves more flexibility by changing it to a declarative definition.

```javascript
function double(num) {
    return num * 2;
}
```

Using declaration notation implicitly defines the variable and allows us to call the function before it exists. Returning to our function `double`, if we use the old style and try to  execute the function before we define it, we'll get an error.

```javascript
double(10); // ERROR
var double = function(num) {
    return num * 2;
}
```

But using declaration notation works.

```javascript
double(10); // 20
function double(num) {
    return num * 2;
}
```

## Smashing the Call Stack

As we saw above, functions can call other functions. Just be careful that you don't create an endless loop.

```javascript
function back() {
    return forth();
}

function forth() {
    return back();
}

back();
```

This causes a stack overflow.

## Optional Arguments

`alert("One Potato", "Two Potato", "Three Potato", "Four");`

The previous example is totally valid Javascript. The `alert()` function only requires one argument, but if you pass it several, its ok, because [Javascript don't give a damn](http://i.imgur.com/biBKPIK.jpg). In fact, if you pass too many arguments, Javascript just ignores the extras and if you pass too few, the missing ones get passed as `undefined`.

This also means you can easily pass too many or too few arguments to a function and it won't let you know something is wrong.

On the up side, this also means that you can use this as a type of optional arguments.

```javascript
function power(base, exponent) {
    if (exponent === undefined) {
        exponent = 2;
    }
    var result = 1;

    for (var count = 0; count < exponent; count++) {
        result *= base;
    }

    return result;
}
```

In the next section, we'll talk about how to define a function that can accept and use any number of arguments, like `console.log()` does:

```javascript
console.log("easy", "breezy", "beautiful"); // easy breezy beautiful
```

## Closure

Earlier, I said that the parameters and local variables of a function only survive for as long as it takes to run the function. How can we store and retrieve a local variable  when the function that created it is no longer active?

```javascript
function wrapFunction(val) {
    var local_variable = val;

    return function() {
        return local_variable;
    }
}

var p_funk = wrapFunction("Funky Music");
var cool_yr = wrapFunction(1982);

p_funk();
cool_yr();
```

Each time you do this, you create new local variables inside the functions and each one is unique.

The anonymous function inside of `wrapFunction` is called a *closure* because it encloses a local variable.

### Why Use a Closure?

See: [Why use "closure"?](http://howtonode.org/why-use-closure)

Additional reading:

* [Getting Closure](http://markdaggett.com/blog/2013/02/25/getting-closure/)
* [JavaScript/Anonymous Functions](http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/JavaScript/Anonymous_Functions)

## Recursive Functions

You can have a function call itself just as long as you are careful to not overflow that memory stack.

```javascript
function power(base, exponent) {
    if (exponent == 0) {
        return 1;
    } else {
        return base * power(base, exponent - 1);
    }
}

console.log(power(2, 3));
```

This method of calculating an exponent is more elegant (read shorter) than the loop method we used above, however its actually about 10 times slower.

Discussion

* Let's talk about readability vs elegance.
* Why would we use functions? *<abbr title="Write Everything Twice">WET</abbr> vs <abbr title="Don't Repeat Yourself">DRY</abbr>*

# Exercises

## Minimum

Write a function called 'min' that accepts 2 number as arguments and returns the smallest of them.
