# Objects, Arrays, Maps and Sets

We've talked about Strings, Numbers, Booleans, Null, and Undefined, but you can't build a snowman with a single snowflake. Sometimes, we need more complex sets of data. Objects are a great way to group information together and build structures that have more than a single value within.

## Data Sets

When we want to work with digital data, we need a way to represent it in our machine's memory. Say for example, we have a Fibonacci Sequence: 0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, and 21.

We could store these numbers in a string, since there is essentially no limit to how long a string can be, and do something like - "0 1 1 2 3 5 8 13 21" to represent part of the sequence. This, however, presents us with many opportunities to bang our head on our desk trying to get the data back out.

Lucky for us, Javascript has simple ways of collecting groups of data together in a single variable. The first way we'll talk about is called an *array* and is written as a comma-separated list between a pair of square brackets.

```javascript
var fibonacci_sequence = [0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21];
fibonacci_sequence[4];
// 3
fibonacci_sequence[5 - 4];
// 1
```

To get the value of one of the elements inside an array, you put a pair of square brackets after the expression that defines the array and inside the brackets, you put another expression.

Javascript arrays are zero-based, so the first element in our Fibonacci sequence can be found at fibonacci_sequence[0]. This is very common among programming languages, but if you don't have much programming experience, it can take a little time to adjust to this difference.

## Properties

We've seen some *properties* such as `Math.toPrecision()` to round a float to a specific number of significant figures, and `String.length` to find out how many characters are in a string.

Nearly every Javascript value has properties, except for `null` and `undefined`.

```javascript
null.length;
// TypeError: Cannot read property 'length' of null
```

The two most common ways of accessing properties in Javascript are using square brackets or using dot notation. Both fibonacci_sequence.n and fibonacci_sequence[n] attempt to access properties of fibonacci_sequence, but they don't always attempt to access the *same* property. For example, say we assign a value to `n` and pass it to fibonacci_sequence:

```javascript
var n = 6;

fibonacci_sequence.n;
// undefined
fibonacci_sequence[n];
// 8
```

When we use dot notation, we try to access a property by its named. On the other hand, when we use the bracket notation, the expression within the brackets are first evaluated, then Javascript tries to find a property with that name. So, if you are looking for a property of an object and you know its name, for example, "length", you can call `fibonacci_sequence.length`, and if you want to grab a property named by the value held within a variable named "nope", you can use fibonacci_sequence[nope]. In the event that you know a property's name, but that name isn't a valid variable name, you can still use bracket notation. If you were looking for a property named "7" or "David Bowie", you could do it by calling fibonacci_sequence["7"] or fibonacci_sequence["David Bowie"].

## Methods

Every string and array has several properties that refer to function values.

```javascript
var noise = "Screaming!";
console.log(typeof noise.toUpperCase);
// function
console.log(noise.toUpperCase());
// "SCREAMING!"
```

Every string has a `toUpperCase` property. When you call it, it returns a copy of the string in all uppercase letters. You may have noticed, that unlike all the functions we have written so far, you don't pass the string to the function, yet it somehow manages to affect the string. We'll find out soon how that works.

Properties of an object that contain functions are called "methods".

Some of the methods in an array include:

```javascript
var fibonacci_sequence = [0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21];
fibonacci_sequence.push(13+21);
fibonacci_sequence.push(55, 89);
console.log(fibonacci_sequence);
// [0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89]
console.log(fibonacci_sequence.join(" "));
// 0 1 1 2 3 5 8 13 21 34 55 89
console.log(fibonacci_sequence.pop());
// 89
console.log(fibonacci_sequence);
// [0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55]
```

The `push` method adds values to the end of an array. The pop method removes the value from the end of the array and returns it. An array can be flattened to a single string with the join method. The argument given to join determines the text that is glued between the array's elements. You'll recall this is the opposite of the `String.split` method.

## Objects

We have arrays, but sometimes we want to do something other than just list a bunch of things. An *object* provides us a way of arbitrarily adding and removing properties to a collection.

```javascript
var week = {
    day1: "Monday",
    day2: "Tuesday",
    day3: "Wednesday",
    day4: "Thursday",
    day5: "Friday",
    weekend: ["Saturday", "Sunday"]
};

console.log(week.day1);
// "Monday"
console.log(week.workin);
// undefined
week.workin = "For the weekend!";
console.log(week.workin);
// "For the weekend!"
```

Inside the curly braces, we can give a list of properties separated by commas. Each property is written as a name, followed by a colon, followed by an expression that provides a value for the property. Spaces and line breaks are not significant. When an object spans multiple lines, indenting it like in the previous example improves readability. Properties whose names are not valid variable names or valid numbers have to be quoted.

```javascript
var sample = {
    cspan: "Ugh",
    "Music TV": "Where's the music?",
    "100": 99
};
```

Reading a property that doesn't exist will produce the value undefined, as happens the first time we try to read the `workin` property in the previous example.

You can assign a value to a property expression with the `=` operator. This will replace the property's value if it already existed or create a new property on the object if not.

You can delete a property from an object using the `delete` operator. You can also test to see if an object contains a property by using the `in` operator.

```javascript
var sampleObject = {
    left: 50,
    right: true
};
console.log(sampleObject.left);
// 50
delete sampleObject.left;
console.log(sampleObject.left);
// undefined
console.log("left" in sampleObject);
// false
console.log("right" in sampleObject);
// true
```

## Mutability

Strings, Booleans, and Numbers are all *immutable*. That means once you create them, they cannot be changed. This sounds weird, so let's look at an example to help understand it.

```javascript
var str = "foo";
console.log(str.substr(1));
// oo
console.log(str);
// foo
```

In the example above, we create a string "foo" and assign it to the variable `str`. When we call the `substr` method and are returned a new string "oo". When we check the value of `str`, we see that its value hasn't changed. We can change the value of the variable `str` to be a different string, but "foo" will never change.

On the other hand, the content of a value in an object can be modified by changing its properties.

When we have two numbers, 500 and 500, we can consider them exactly the same number, even if they don't refer to the same physical bits. With objects, there is a difference between having two references to the same object and having two different objects that contain the same properties. Consider the following code:

```javascript
var object1 = {value: 10};
var object2 = object1;
var object3 = {value: 10};

console.log(object1 === object2);
// true
console.log(object1 === object3);
// false

object1.value = 15;
console.log(object2.value);
// 15
console.log(object3.value);
// 10
```

`object1` and `object2` reference the same memory on a computer. This means when we change the value of a property in `object1`, `object2` will update too, because they are the same object. `object3` on the other hand, is identical to `object1` and `object2`, but it exists in a different place in the computer memory.

## More Array Methods

Arrays have many cool methods attached to them:

```javascript
var tvShows = [
    "King of the Hill",
    "M.A.S.H.",
    "ALF",
    "Adventure Time with Finn and Jake"
];

console.log(tvShows);
// ["King of the Hill", "M.A.S.H.", "ALF", "Adventure Time with Finn and Jake"]

tvShows.push("You Can't Do That on Television");
console.log(tvShows);
// ["King of the Hill", "M.A.S.H.", "ALF", "Adventure Time with Finn and Jake", "You Can't Do That on Television"]

tvShows.sort();
console.log(tvShows);
// ["ALF", "Adventure Time with Finn and Jake", "King of the Hill", "M.A.S.H.", "You Can't Do That on Television"]

tvShows.reverse();
console.log(tvShows);
// ["You Can't Do That on Television", "M.A.S.H.", "King of the Hill", "Adventure Time with Finn and Jake", "ALF"]

tvShows.shift();
// "You Can't Do That on Television"
console.log(tvShows);
// ["M.A.S.H.", "King of the Hill", "Adventure Time with Finn and Jake", "ALF"]

tvShows.unshift("Entertainment Tonight");
console.log(tvShows);
// ["Entertainment Tonight", "M.A.S.H.", "King of the Hill", "Adventure Time with Finn and Jake", "ALF"]

tvShows.indexOf("ALF");
// 4

tvShows.slice(2);
// ["King of the Hill", "Adventure Time with Finn and Jake", "ALF"]
console.log(tvShows);
// ["Entertainment Tonight", "M.A.S.H.", "King of the Hill", "Adventure Time with Finn and Jake", "ALF"]

tvShows.slice(2, 4);
// ["King of the Hill", "Adventure Time with Finn and Jake"]
console.log(tvShows);
// ["Entertainment Tonight", "M.A.S.H.", "King of the Hill", "Adventure Time with Finn and Jake", "ALF"]

```

You can use all of these methods on strings too.

## The Arguments Object

We talked about how functions can accept more or fewer arguments than they intended. Functions have a special object called `arguments` that lists all the arguments passed, much like an array.

```javascript
function argumentList() {
    console.log(`I have ${arguments.length} arguments.`);
    console.log(arguments);
}
```

*You'll notice here that we placed a string inside backticks (\`) and text placeholders (${}), thse are experimental ES6 features that we are using here to simplify the output. Feel free to read more about [template strings](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/template_strings).*

---
---
---
## Maps and Sets (Experimental ES6 Features)

### Sets

Arrays are cool, but they are pretty indiscriminate about what data you put in them. Let's look at an array called clutch, named for one of my favorite bands with data in it that describes one of my favorite songs by them.

```javascript
var clutch = [1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1];
```

Let us say for sake of argument, that we want to know the unique values in that array. We could do something like sort the array, iterate or loop through it, compare two values, and using the second value if they are different, but that sounds hard, and I don't like hard work.

Thankfully, in the upcoming version of Javascript, we have Sets. Sets are objects that behave like arrays, except that they only keep unique values. We can create a new Set and pass it the clutch array and it will reduce all the duplicates:

```javascript
var clutch = [1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1];
var my_set = new Set(clutch);
console.log(my_set);
// Set {1, 0}
```

We can add new items to a set by calling the `new` method on a Set object and passing it the value we want to insert.

```javascript
my_set.add("Periodic Table");
console.log(my_set);
// Set {1, 0, "Periodic Table"}
```

Unlike objects and array, a Set object doesn't have a `length`. Instead, it has a `size` property.

```javascript
console.log(my_set.length);
// undefined
console.log(my_set.size);
// 3
```

We can find out if a Set contains a value by calling the `has` method on a Set object.

```javascript
console.log(my_set.has("pfunk"));
// false
console.log(my_set.has(0));
// true
```

We can remove items from a Set object by calling the `delete` method on a Set object.

```javascript
my_set.delete(0);
console.log(my_set);
// Set {1, "Periodic Table"}
```

### Maps

A Map is an object full of key/value pairs.

```javascript
var my_map = new Map();

my_map.set("artist", "David Bowie");
my_map.set("movie", "The Abyss");


console.log(my_map);
// Map {"artist" => "David Bowie", "movie" => "The Abyss", "year" => 1982}

console.log(my_map.get("artist"));
// David Bowie

typeof my_map.get("artist");
// "string"

console.log(my_map.has("artist"));
// true
console.log(my_map.has("tv"));
// false
```

---
---
---

## Exercises

### Sum and Range

Using what you have learned in the first 4 sessions, write a function called `range` that accepts two arguments, `start` and `end`. This function should return an array with all the numbers from `start` and ending with `end`.

```javascript
// Expected behavior
range(1, 10);
// [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]
```

Next create a `sum` function that accepts an array of numbers and returns the total of the numbers therein.

```javascript
// Expected behavior
sum([1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]);
// 55
sum([1, 2, 4]);
// 7
```

### Fibonacci Sequence

The Fibonacci Sequence is a series of numbers starting with 0 and 1. Each next number in the sequence is the sum of the last 2 numbers. Write a `fibonacci` function that accepts an argument named `length` and returns an array with that many Fibonacci numbers.

```javascript
// Expected behavior
fibonacci(2);
// [0, 1]
fibonacci(3);
// [0, 1, 1]
fibonacci(5);
// [0, 1, 1, 2, 3]
```
