# Higher-Order Functions

A large program is typically a complex program. It takes time to write a large program and they are where errors come from. Let's compare two sample programs. The first is six lines long and is fully self contained:

```javascript
var total = 0, count = 1;
while (count <= 10) {
    total += count;
    count += 1;
}
console.log(total);
```

The second is just a single line and references 2 outside functions:

```javascript
console.log(sum(range(1, 10)));
```

Which is more likely to contain a bug?

Even considering that `sum()` and `range()` have some code related to them somewhere, I'd venture that the single line code is less likely to contain bugs because its easier to read. Its easier to read because the internals of how the `sum()` and `range()` functions work are tucked away.

## Abstraction

In the context of programming, hiding away parts of the code like above is called *abstraction*. Abstractions hide away details and allow us to talk about programs at a more abstract, or higher level.

As an analogy, compare these two recipes for pea soup:

> Put 1 cup of dried peas per person into a container. Add water until the peas are well covered. Leave the peas in water for at least 12 hours. Take the peas out of the water and put them in a cooking pan. Add 4 cups of water per person. Cover the pan and keep the peas simmering for two hours. Take half an onion per person. Cut it into pieces with a knife. Add it to the peas. Take a stalk of celery per person. Cut it into pieces with a knife. Add it to the peas. Take a carrot per person. Cut it into pieces. With a knife! Add it to the peas. Cook for 10 more minutes.

And the second recipe:

> Per person: 1 cup dried split peas, half a chopped onion, a stalk of celery, and a carrot.

> Soak peas for 12 hours. Simmer for 2 hours in 4 cups of water (per person). Chop and add vegetables. Cook for 10 more minutes.

> The second is shorter and easier to interpret. But you do need to understand a few more cooking-related words - *soak*, *simmer*, *chop*, and, *vegetable*.

When we are programming, these words won't all be predefined for us, so we'll often fall into the pattern of the first example, working out the precise steps the program has to perform, line-by-line, ignorant of the higher-level concepts that they express.

## Abstracting array traversal

Functions are useful for building abstractions, but sometimes they fall a little short.

Earlier, we looked at loops.

```javascript
var array = [1, 2, 3];
for (var i = 0; i < array.length; i++) {
    var current = array[i];
    console.log(current);
}
```

This bit of code says, "For each item in the array, log its value to the console". However, it does it in a roundabout way, using a counter variable `i`, a check against the array length, and by defining an extra variable.

Let's abstract this into a function.

```javascript
function logEach(array) {
    for (var i = 0; i < array.length; i++) {
        console.log(array[i]);
    }
}
```

Easy, but what if we want to do something other than log it to the console? Remember, "doing something" can be represented as a function and a function is just a value. We can pass a function to a function as an argument.

```javascript
function forEach(array, action) {
    for (var i = 0; i < array.length; i++) {
        action(array[i]);
    }
}

forEach(["Moe", "Larry", "Curly"], alert);
// Wampeter
// Foma
// Granfalloon
```

Often, you won't pass a predefined function to forEach but instead create a function value on the spot.

```javascript
var numbers = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5], sum = 0;
forEach(numbers, function(number) {
    sum += number;
});
console.log(sum);
// 15
```

This looks a bunch like a regular loop, with its body wrapped within a block of code. Its also wrapped in a function, so it must be inside the parentheses.

Using this pattern, we can specify a variable name for the current item rather than having to grab it from the array manually.

`forEach` is actually a method already built into arrays and it only requires one argument, a function to act on each element. Take the following sample function that loops through an array and add each item to a total.

```javascript
var big_array = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10];

function sum(array) {
    var total = 0;
    for(var i = 0; i < array.length; i++) {
        total += array[i];
    }
    return total;
}
```

We could write the same functionality using the native `forEach`.

```javascript
var big_array = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10];

function sum(array) {
    var total = 0;
    array.forEach( function(element) {
        total += element;
    });
    return total;
}
```

This second example is a tiny bit shorter, but a bit easier to read.

## Higher-order functions

Some functions accept other functions as arguments or return functions. These are called *Higher-order functions*. Higher-order functions allow us to abstract actions, not just values. The following function creates new functions.

```javascript
function greaterThan(n) {
    return function(m) { return m > n; };
}
var greaterThan10 = greaterThan(10);
console.log(greaterThan10(11));
```

```javascript
function typeSet(f) {
    return function(arg) {
        console.log("calling with", arg);
        var val = f(arg);
        console.log("called with", arg, "- got", val);
        return val;
    };
}
typeSet(Boolean)(0);
// calling with 0
// called with 0 - got false
```

You can also write functions that provide new types of flow control.

```javascript
function unless(test, then) {
    if (!test) { then() };
}
function repeat(times, body) {
  for (var i = 0; i < times; i++) { body(i) };
}

unless(0 === false, function() {
    console.log("its false!");
});

repeat(10, function(i) {
    console.log(`Hey, I'm number ${i}!`);
});
```

## Passing along arguments

The `typeSet` function above wraps an argument in a function, which is pretty cool, but it has a major drawback.

```javascript
typeSet(Boolean)(0, 1, 2);
// calling with 0
// called with 0 - got false
```

If we pass it several arguments, everything after the first gets ignored. We could add a bunch of arguments to the inner function (arg1, arg2, and etc) and pass them all to `f`, but we don't know how many is enough. This solution would also deprive f of the information in arguments.length. Since we'd always pass the same number of arguments, it wouldn't know how many arguments were originally given.

When this happens, Javascript has the `apply` method. You can pass it an array or array-like object of arguments and it will call the function with those arguments.

```javascript
function transparentWrapping(f) {
    return function() {
        return f.apply(null, arguments);
    };
}
```

This is a useless function, but it shows the pattern we are interested in, the function it returns passes all of the given arguments, to f. It does this by passing its own arguments object to `apply`. The first argument to apply, for which we are passing null here, can be used to simulate a method call. We will come back to this later.

## JSON

Higher-order functions that somehow apply a function to the elements of an array are often used in JavaScript. The `forEach` method is of those functions. There are several more that we will explore here, but first, let's make some data.

```javascript
var movie_list = [
    {"title": "The Abyss", "genre": "Sci-Fi", "release_date": 1989, "director": "James Cameron"},
    {"title": "Alien", "genre": "Sci-Fi", "release_date": 1979, "director": "Ridley Scott"},
    {"title": "Aliens", "genre": "Sci-Fi", "release_date": 1986, "director": "James Cameron"},
    {"title": "Field of Dreams", "genre": "Drama", "release_date": 1989, "director": "Phil Alden Robinson"},
    {"title": "The Incredibles", "genre": "Action", "release_date": 2004, "director": "Brad Bird"},
    {"title": "Sphere", "genre": "Sci-Fi", "release_date": 1998, "director": "Barry Levinson"}
]
```

This is called JSON (pronounced "Jason"), which is an acronym for JavaScript Object Notation. It is used as a data storage and communication format on the internet.

JSON is much like Javascript objects with a few exceptions.

1. All property names have to be surrounded by double quotes
1. Only simple data expressions are allowed, meaning no function calls, variables, or anything that involves actual computation
1. No comments in JSON

JSON has a few built in methods that we should look at, `JSON.stringify` and `JSON.parse`.

```javascript
var json_string = JSON.stringify({"title": "Alien", "genre": "Sci-Fi", "release_date": 1979, "director": "Ridley Scott"})
console.log(json_string);
// {"title":"Alien","genre":"Sci-Fi","release_date":1979,"director":"Ridley Scott"}
console.log(JSON.parse(json_string).title);
// Alien
```

Let's find out how long the movie list is.

```javascript
console.log(movie_list.length);
// 6
```

## Filtering an array

Say we want to find out which movies were made in the 80's, the following function may help.

```javascript
function filter(array, test) {
    var passed = [];
    for(var i = 0; i < array.length; i++) {
        if (test(array[i])) {
            passed.push(array[i]);
        }
    }
    return passed;
}

console.log(filter(movie_list, function(movie) {
    return movie.release_date > 1979 && movie.release_date < 1990;
}));
// [{"title": "The Abyss", "genre": "Sci-Fi", "release_date": 1989, "director": "James Cameron"}, {"title": "Field of Dreams", "genre": "Drama", "release_date": 1989, "director": "Phil Alden Robinson"}]
```

Here we are using an argument named `test` to pass a function that tests each item and determine if it passes and is subsequently added to the return array.

Three movies were made between 1980 and 1989, "The Abyss", "Aliens" and "Field of Dreams".

Notice that rather deleting items from the array, `filter` builds a new one. When a function accepts an array, doesn't change it, and returns a new array, we call it a "pure" function.

Just like `forEach`, `filter` is actually a standard array method. Instead of the function above, we can do it just like this:

```javascript
console.log(movie_list.filter(function(movie) {
    return movie.genre === "Sci-Fi";
}));
// returns "The Abyss", "Alien", "Aliens", and "Sphere" in a new array of objects
```

## Transforming with map

Say now we have an array of objects representing movies, we got this array by filtering the `movie_list` array. We want an array of the directors' names so we can talk about how these are the best directors ever and they never made any mistakes.

```javascript
function map(array, transform) {
    var mapped = [];
    for(var i = 0; i < array.length; i++) {
        mapped.push(transform(array[i]));
    }
    return mapped;
}

var before_2000 = movie_list.filter(function (movie) {
    return movie.release_date < 2000;
});

console.log(map(before_2000, function(movie) {
    return movie.director;
}));
// ["James Cameron", "Ridley Scott", "James Cameron", "Phil Alden Robinson", "Barry Levinson"]
```

Just like `forEach` and `filter` before it, `map` is a standard method in arrays.

## Summarizing with reduce

Frequently, we want to calculate a single value from several values in an array. We can do this with the `reduce` method.

```javascript
function reduce(array, combine, start) {
    var current = start;
    for (var i = 0; i < array.length; i++) {
        current = combine(current, array[i]);
    }
    return current;
}

console.log(reduce([1, 2, 3, 4], function(a, b) {
  return a + b;
}, 0));
```

Or we want to grab the earliest of the movies from our `movie_list` object.

```javascript
console.log(movie_list.reduce(function(prev, cur) {
    if (cur.release_date < prev.release_date) {
        return cur;
    } else {
        return prev;
    }
}));
// Object {title: "Alien", genre: "Sci-Fi", release_date: 1979, director: "Ridley Scott"}
```

## Composability

How would we have written the function above without higher-order functions? Its not too bad.

```javascript
var prev = movie_list[0];
for (var i = 1; i < movie_list.length; i++) {
    var cur = movie_list[i];
    if (cur.release_date < prev.release_date) {
        prev = cur;
    }
}
console.log(prev);
```

There are more variables, its a little longer, but its not too tough to understand. This begs the question, "Why would I want to use higher-order functions?" Higher-order functions are really awesome when you want to *compose* functions. For example, lets get the average year that a Sci-Fi movie by James Cameron was released.

```javascript
function average(array) {
    function plus(a, b) { return a + b; }
    return array.reduce(plus) / array.length;
}
function year(movie) {
    return movie.release_date;
}
function director(movie) {
    return movie.director === "James Cameron";
}
function genre(movie) {
    return movie.genre === "Sci-Fi";
}
console.log(average(movie_list.filter(director).filter(genre).map(year)));
// 1987.5
```

These functions are kind of nonsense, we should create closures to build custom functions what don't have all the data hard-coded, but this is just an example. This is however, much more readable than a bunch of loops and whatever we could figure out to make everything work. This readability comes with a cost.

## The Cost

Elegant code is wonderful, its easy to read. The major drawback is that it's inefficient. Passing a function to `forEach` and letting that method handle array iteration is slower than a `for` loop. Many techniques we use to make programs easier to read make them slower, adding to the work a machine needs to do to produce a result. Lucky for us, modern machines are really, really fast and slowdown is only a major concern if fractions or fractions of seconds matter and in most case, they won't.

## Binding

The `bind` method, a method that belongs to all functions, creates a new function that calls the original with some of the arguments already set.

The following code shows an example of `bind` in use. It defines a function `isInSet` that tells us whether a person is in a given set of strings. To call `filter` in order to collect those person objects whose names are in a specific set, we can either write a function expression that makes a call to `isInSet` with our set as its first argument or partially apply the `isInSet` function.

```javascript
var theSet = ["Ridley Scott", "James Cameron", "Peter Jackson"];
function isInSet(set, person) {
    return set.indexOf(person.director) > -1;
}

console.log(movie_list.filter(function(person) {
    return isInSet(theSet, person);
}));
// [{director: "Ridley Scott", ...}, {director: "James Cameron", ...}]

console.log(movie_list.filter(isInSet.bind(null, theSet)));
// ... same result
```

The call to `bind` returns a function that will call `isInSet` with `theSet` as first argument, followed by any remaining arguments given to the bound function. The first argument, where the example passes `null`, is used for method calls, similar to the first argument to `apply`. We'll talk more about what this means soon.

For more information check out [Understanding JavaScript’s Function.prototype.bind](http://www.smashingmagazine.com/2014/01/23/understanding-javascript-function-prototype-bind/)

## Summary

Being able to pass function values to other functions is a really awesome thing Javascript let's us do.

Arrays provide a number of useful higher-order methods sich as `forEach` to do something with each element in an array, `filter` to build a new array with some elements filtered out, `map` to build a new array where each element has been put through a function, and `reduce` to combine all an array's elements into a single value.

Functions have an `apply` method that can be used to call them with an array specifying their arguments and a `bind` method, which is used to create a partially applied version of the function.

## Exercises

### Flattening

Use the `reduce` method in combination with the `concat` method to "flatten" an array of arrays into a single array that has all the elements of the input arrays.

```javascript
var arrays = [[1, 2, 3], [4, 5], [6]];
// Your code here.
// [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]
```

### Every and Some

Arrays also come with the standard methods `every` and `some`. Both take a predicate function that, when called with an array element as argument, returns `true` or `false`. Just like `&&` returns a true value only when the expressions on both sides are true, `every` returns `true` only when the predicate returns `true` for all elements of the array. Similarly, `some` returns `true` as soon as the predicate returns `true` for any of the elements. They do not process more elements than necessary.

Write two functions, `every` and `some`, that behave like these methods, except that they take the array as their first argument rather than being a method.

```javascript
function every() {}
function some() {}

console.log(every([NaN, NaN, NaN], isNaN));
// true
console.log(every([NaN, NaN, 4], isNaN));
// false
console.log(some([NaN, 3, 4], isNaN));
// true
console.log(some([2, 3, 4], isNaN));
// false
```
