# Bugs and Error Handling

When we write Javascript, we sometimes wind up with mistakes. Those mistakes might be easy to find, or really difficult.

Sometimes, bugs are totally out of our control. Users are really good at introducing bugs. If you are working with 3rd party APIs, don't be surprised if they up and change an endpoint without letting you know. Then, 3 weeks later, your client is wondering why their forms haven't stored any data. That may have happened to me, I am totally not bitter about it!

## Programmer mistakes

We make mistakes. Its okay! We just need to find them and fix them. Sometimes, those mistakes are little typos that immediately cause the Javascript console to alert up of an error. Other times, we make a mistake in the logic, or somewhere else that doesn't cause the program to stop working, it just causes it to not work right.

Different languages provide differing amounts of assistance in finding bugs. On one end of the spectrum, languages like C++ are strongly types and compiled. If you tell the program it should expect data in one format, and it comes along in a different format, the C++ compiler will tell you. Way, way on the other end, we have Javascript. Javascript is loosely typed, it doesn't care what sort of data is moved around. Many times, errors will go unnoticed by the browser. Many times, you won't know there's a bug until the program just doesn't do what you expect.

When we go looking for bugs and fixing them, we are *debugging*.

## Strict mode

We can force Javascript to care a little more about how we code by enabling strict mode. We do that by including `use strict;` either at the top of a file or at the top of each function.

```javascript
function iHaveAProblem() {
    "use strict";
    for (iterator = 0; iterator < 10; iterator++) {
        console.log(iterator);
    }
}

iHaveAProblem();
// ReferenceError: iterator is not defined
```

Usually, when we neglect to include the `var` keyword and define a variable for the first time, nothing happens. in strict mode, we get a reference error telling us that the variable has never been defined.

When we use strict mode, the `this` keyword is undefined in functions not called as a method. When not in strict mode, `this` refers to the global `Object`. If you call a method or constructor incorrectly in strict mode, we'll get an error instead of creating and reading global variables.

```javascript
function Automobile(make) {
    this.make = make;
}
var civic = Automobile("Honda");
console.log(make);
// Honda
```

Here, a bad call to `Automobile` worked, returned an undefined value, and globally defined 'make'. In strict mode though,

```javascript
"use strict";
function Automobile(make) {
    this.make = make;
}
var civic = Automobile("Honda");
// Uncaught TypeError: Cannot set property 'make' of undefined
```

Here, the program errors because we `this` doesn't work in a function if it isn't constructing a `new` object.

Finally, when we are in strict mode, we cannot define a function with more than one argument of the same name.

```javascript
"use strict";
function tvShow(channel, channel) {
    console.log(channel);
}
// Uncaught SyntaxError: Strict mode function may not have duplicate parameter names
```

Basically, running in strict mode will often help us catch bugs before they get nasty and it will probably never cause any problems it shouldn't.

## Testing

Since Javascript doesn't go out of its way to help us find errors, we have to do a little heavy lifting to find them outselves, by tirelessly trying every possibility to break our own software.

Doing this from scratch every time will slowly and definitely drive us mad, luckily there are tools we can use to help us, such as [Jasmine](http://jasmine.github.io/).

Let's look at the `Vector` prototype from the exercise last chapter.

```javascript
function Vector(x, y) {
    this.x = x;
    this.y = y;
}
Vector.prototype.plus = function(other) {
    return new Vector(this.x + other.x, this.y + other.y);
};
```

Let's write a program that checks that our implementation of `Vector` works as we want. Then, any time we change `Vector`, we rerun the tests to make sure they still work the way we want.

```javascript
function testVector() {
    var p1 = new Vector(5, 10);
    var p2 = new Vector(-10, 5);
    var p3 = p1.plus(p2);

    if (p1.x !== 5) { return "FAIL: x property"; }
    if (p1.y !== 10) { return "FAIL: y property"; }
    if (p2.x !== -10) { return "FAIL: negative x property"; }
    if (p3.x !== -5) { return "FAIL: x from plus method"; }
    if (p3.y !== 15) { return "FAIL: y from plus method"; }
    return "All tests PASSED!";
}
console.log(testVector());
// All tests PASSED!
```

## Debugging

When you notice something is wrong in your code, you gotta find what the problem is.

Sometimes the error message will tell you exactly where to look, down to the line number and column.

Sometimes, its almost as if your code hates you. Maybe the error is just the first time the code breaks and not the cause of the problem. Other times, there's no error at all, it just doesn't behave the way you expect it would.

The following code attempts to convert a number to a string in any base by repeatedly picking out the last digit and then dividing the number to get rid of this digit. When we run it, it becomes clear there is a major bug.

```javascript
function numberToString(n, base) {
  var result = "", sign = "";
  if (n < 0) {
    sign = "-";
    n = -n;
  }
  do {
    result = String(n % base) + result;
    n /= base;
  } while (n > 0);
  return sign + result;
}
console.log(numberToString(13, 10));
// 1.5e-3231.3e-3221.3e-3211.3e-3201.3e-3191.3e-3181.3e-3171.3e-3161.3e-3151....
```

Here, we know there's a bug, we just gotta find out where.

Instead of jumping in and making random changes (something I am still guilty of doing all the time), lets look at the code and work through it to try to figure out what's happening.

One way to debug is to add some `console.log` and see what's happening inside. If we add one to the start of the do..while loop and log `n`, we get the following.

```javascript
// 13
// 1.3
// 0.13
// 0.013000000000000001
// 0.0013000000000000002
// ...and on
```

So, we see that dividing by 10 doesn't produce a whole number. Instead of `n /= base`, we need to round the number to an integer by doing `n = Math.floor(n / base)`.

Another thing you can do instead of using `console.log` is to use your browser's built in debugger. I can't explain how to do it for every browser since they often differ in little ways, but here's some links you might find useful:

* Chrome: [Debugging JavaScript](https://developer.chrome.com/devtools/docs/javascript-debugging)
* Firefox: [Debugger](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Tools/Debugger)
* Internet Explorer: [Using the F12 developer tools](https://msdn.microsoft.com/library/ie/bg182326)
* Safari: [Debugger](https://developer.apple.com/library/mac/documentation/AppleApplications/Conceptual/Safari_Developer_Guide/Debugger/Debugger.html)

## Error propagation

Some problems can't be prevented with strict mode and lots of tests. If your program communicates with 3rd-party APIs or allows user input, there's a good chance the input could be send invalid or that the outside system is broken or unresponsive.

Our little programs could just throw in the towel and not work, but in the real world, you gotta make it happen. Sometimes we want to ignore the problem and keep going, sometimes we do want to give up and report the problem.

Let's look at a function called `promptInteger` that expects a number but the user sends a string. We could return something like `null` or `undefined`.

```javascript
function promptNumber(question) {
    "use strict";
    var result = Number(prompt(question, ""));
    if (isNaN(result)) {
        return null;
    }
    return result;
}
```

This is pretty okay. When 'promptNumber' is called, we check to see if the input is a number. If not, we return `null` and the program continues. This is probabaly ok most of the time, but what if a function can return `null` when everything is working, but there is just nothing to return? In that case, we would have a hard time determining if the `null` return was good or bad.

Next, what if we are calling 'promptNumber' many times. We have to check every time if the value returned is useful and valid.

## Exceptions

There are times when a program just cannot continue and we need to stop and go back to someplace that can handle the problem. We call this *exception handling*.

Exceptions are like very verbose `return` statements but exceptions don't just break out of the function, it breaks all the way out of the program. Once you have broken all the way out, we can *catch* those exceptions, do something with it, and optionally continue the program from where we left off.

```javascript
function promptDirection(question) {
    "use strict";
    var result = prompt(question, "");
    if (result.toLowerCase() === "left") { return "L"; }
    if (result.toLowerCase() === "right") { return "R"; }
    throw new Error("Invalid direction: " + result);
}

function look() {
    "use strict";
    if (promptDirection("Which way?") === "L") {
        return "a house";
    } else {
        return "two angry bears";
    }
}

try {
    console.log("You see", look());
} catch (error) {
    console.log("Something went wrong: " + error);
}

```
The `throw` keyword is used to raise a new exception. Then we use a `try/catch` block to evaluate the result and act accordingly. After the `try` or `catch` is evaluated, the program continues below the block and runs whatever code is left.

We also use the `Error` constructor to create a value for the exception.  The Error object has a `message` property and modern browsers also track information from the call stack that might be helpful in tracking down the root problem in the `stack` property.

Notice how we potentially throw an error in `promptDirection` but ignore the possibility that something may be wrong in `look`. We typically only throw exceptions at the point an error can happen.

## Cleaning up after exceptions

Consider the following situation: a function, `withContext`, wants to make sure that, during its execution, the top-level variable context holds a specific context value. After it finishes, it restores this variable to its old value.

```javascript
var context = null;

function withContext(newContext, body) {
    var oldContext = context;
    context = newContext;
    var result = body();
    context = oldContext;
    return result;
}
```

What if `body` raises an exception? In that case, the call to `withContext` will be thrown off the stack by the exception, and `context` will never be set back to its old value.

There is one more feature that `try` statements have. They may be followed by a `finally` block either instead of or in addition to a `catch` block. A `finally` block means "No matter what happens, run this code after trying to run the code in the `try` block". If a function has to clean something up, the cleanup code should usually be put into a `finally` block.

```javascript
function withContext(newContext, body) {
    var oldContext = context;
    context = newContext;
    try {
        return body();
    } finally {
        context = oldContext;
    }
}
```

Note that we no longer have to store the result of `body` (which we want to return) in a variable. Even if we return directly from the `try` block, the `finally` block will be run. Now we can do this and be safe:

```javascript
try {
    withContext(5, function() {
        if (context < 10) {
            throw new Error("Not enough context!");
        }
    });
} catch (e) {
    console.log("Ignoring: " + e);
}
// Ignoring: Error: Not enough context!

console.log(context);
// null
```

Even though the function called from `withContext` exploded, `withContext` itself still properly cleaned up the `context` variable.

## Selective catching

An exception that never gets caught will be handled by the browser, typically being output in the Javascript console. An unhandled exception is a surefire way to signal a problem and the Javascript console will usually provide some info to help track down the problem.

When we expect an error to be a possibility, not catching those errors is bad form.

Invalid use of the language like referencing undefined variables, trying to read a property on `null`, or invoking a function that doesn't exist will result in an exception being raised. We can catch those too.

When the body of a `catch` block is run, we know that *something* in the `try` block caused an exception, but we don't know what or which exception caused it.

Javascript is all or none when it comes to catching exceptions, meaning you won't know if an exception raised is one you expected or one from another error somewhere else. For example, here is an example that attempts to keep on calling `promptDirection` until it gets a valid answer:

```javascript
for (;;) {
    try {
        var dir = promtDirection("Where?"); // typo!
        console.log("You chose ", dir);
        break;
    } catch (e) {
        console.log("Not a valid direction. Try again.");
    }
}
```

The `for (;;)` construct is a way to intentionally create a loop that doesn't end on its own. We can get out of the loop only by providing a valid direction, however we misspelled `promptDirection` meaning that we would never satisfy that condition, causing a stack overflow exception.

Its typically not a good idea to catch all your exceptions in one place unless you are trying to very specifically do something with them, like log them to a database, and even then, consider that you might be losing valuable information about your exceptions.

What if we want to catch a specific kind of exception? We can check in the `catch` block whether the exception is what we want and throwing a new one if not, but how? We could look at the message property, but that is really intended for humans to read and can change depending on if we put something in it. Instead, we can define a new kind of error.

```javascript
function InputError(message) {
    this.message = message;
    this.stack = (new Error()).stack;
}
InputError.prototype = Object.create(Error.prototype);
InputError.prototype.name = "InputError";
```

Here we create a new error that inherits the global `Error`'s stack property and its full prototype, then we redefine the `name` property. The other errors types (Error, SyntaxError, ReferenceError, and so on) already have that property.

The assignment to the stack property tries to give this object a somewhat useful stack trace, on platforms that support it, by creating a regular error object and then using that object’s stack property as its own.

Now `promptDirection` can throw such an error.

```javascript
function promptDirection(question) {
    var result = prompt(question, "");
    if (result.toLowerCase() == "left") { return "L" };
    if (result.toLowerCase() == "right") { return "R" };
    throw new InputError("Invalid direction: " + result);
}
```

And the loop can catch it more carefully.

```javascript
for (;;) {
    try {
        var dir = promptDirection("Where?");
        console.log("You chose ", dir);
        break;
    } catch (e) {
        if (e instanceof InputError) {
          console.log("Not a valid direction. Try again.");
        } else {
          throw e;
        }
    }
}
```

This will catch only instances of InputError and let unrelated exceptions through. If you reintroduce the typo, the undefined variable error will be properly reported.

## Assertions

*Assertions* are a tool to do basic sanity checking for programmer errors. Consider this helper function, `assert`:

```javascript
function AssertionFailed(message) {
    this.message = message;
}
AssertionFailed.prototype = Object.create(Error.prototype);

function assert(test, message) {
    if (!test) {
        throw new AssertionFailed(message);
    }
}

function lastElement(array) {
    assert(array.length > 0, "empty array in lastElement");
    return array[array.length - 1];
}
```

This provides a way to enforce program expectations, blowing up the error log if the condition ever proves false. For example, the `lastElement` fetches the last element of an array and would return `undefined` if the assertion was omitted. Trying to grab the last element of an empty array is usually always the mark of an error.

Assertions are a way to make sure mistakes cause failures at the point of the mistake, rather than silently producing nonsense values later on.

## Summary

People make mistakes, fortunately we have several tools available to help find and fix those errors. Using test suites like Jasmine and adding assertions to your programs can help find problems.

Problems caused by things that are out of our control should fail gracefully. Sometimes we can return a special value like `null`. Usually, you want to throw exceptions.

## Exercises

### Retry

Say you have a function primitiveMultiply that, in 50 percent of cases, multiplies two numbers, and in the other 50 percent, raises an exception of type MultiplicatorUnitFailure. Write a function that wraps this clunky function and just keeps trying until a call succeeds, after which it returns the result.

Make sure you handle only the exceptions you are trying to handle.

```javascript
function MultiplicatorUnitFailure() {}

function primitiveMultiply(a, b) {
    if (Math.random() < 0.5) {
        return a * b;
    } else {
        throw new MultiplicatorUnitFailure();
    }
}

function reliableMultiply(a, b) {
  // Your code here.
}

console.log(reliableMultiply(8, 8));
// 64
```
