# Regular Expressions

## Creating A Regular Expression

A regular expression is a type of object. We can use the `RegExp` constructor or define it using a regular expression literal.

```javascript
var regex1 = new RegExp("abc");
var regex2 = /abc/;
```

Both examples describe the same pattern, an "a", followed by a "b", followed by a "c".

When we use the constructor, the pattern is written as a string, so things like backslashes `\` will be read as such.

when we define a regular expression literal, both back- and forward slashes are treated a little differently. A forward slash will end the pattern, so we need to put a backslash before it if we want it to be part of the pattern. Similarly, if we want a backslash to be part of the pattern, we need to put another backslash ahead of it. There are a bunch more characters that have special meanings if you place backslashes ahead of them.

```javascript
var eighteenPlus = /eighteen\+/;
```

## Testing For Matches

There are several regular expression methods. The easiest is probably `test`. You can pass it a string and it will tell you if the regular expression appears in the string.

```javascript
console.log(/123/.test("12345"));
// true
console.log(/312/.test("12345"));
// false
```

A regular expression without any special characters represents a sequence of characters. If *123* appears anywhere in the test string, `test` will return `true`.

## Matching A Set Of Characters

We could just use `indexOf` if we want to find a simple string within a string, but regular expressions let us define more complicated patterns.

Let's say we want to match any number. We can put any characters between square brackets *[]* and define the characters as part of a set to match against.

Each of these examples will match a string with a single digit in it:

```javascript
console.log(/[0123456789]/.test("in 1982"));
// true
console.log(/[0-9]/.test("in 1982"));
// true
```

When we use square brackets, we can define a range of digits with a dash (-) between them.

There are also some common character groups that have their own built-in shortcuts. For example, `\d` is equivalent to `[0-9]`.

> `\d` Any digit character
> `\w` An alphanumeric character (“word character”)
> `\s` Any whitespace character (space, tab, newline, and similar)
> `\D` A character that is not a digit
> `\W` A nonalphanumeric character
> `\S` A nonwhitespace character
> `.` Any character except for newline

You could match a datetime string such as `2015-04-01 01:23` with the following expression:

```javascript
var dateTime = /\d\d\d\d-\d\d-\d\d \d\d:\d\d/;
console.log(dateTime.test("2015-04-01 01:23"));
// true
console.log(dateTime.test("2015-apr-01 01:23"));
// false
```

Okay, that looks pretty bad, we'll find a way to improve upon it later.

Backslash codes may also be used within square brackets. For example, `[\d.]` will match any digit or a period. If we used the period by itself in the brackets, it would lose its special meaning. This is true for other special characters.

We can invert, or match anything *except* a pattern, by adding a caret (^) at the front of a pattern you would check for.

```javascript
var notBinary = /[^01]/;
console.log(notBinary.test("1100100010100110"));
// false
console.log(notBinary.test("1100100010200110"));
// true
```

## Repeating Parts Of A Pattern

So far, we know how to match a set number of characters, but what if we don't know how many to check for?

If we place a plus sign after something in a regular expression, it will match one or more times. For example, `/\d+/` will match one or more numbers between 0 and 9.

```javascript
console.log(/'\d+'/.test("'123'"));
// true
console.log(/'\d+'/.test("''"));
// false
console.log(/'\d*'/.test("'123'"));
// true
console.log(/'\d*'/.test("''"));
// true
```

The asterisk (*) character is similar to the plus sign except that it matches 0 or more times.

A question mark means the preceding part of the match optional, meaning it may match 0 or 1 times.

```javascript
var neighbor = /neighbou?r/;
console.log(neighbor.test("neighbour"));
// true
console.log(neighbor.test("neighbor"));
// true
```

We can indicate a pattern should match a specific number of times by placing curly brackets "{}" after the pattern we are looking for and inside we can put one or two numbers that indicate the number of times it should match. For example, `{3}` would require exactly 3 matches to return true, `{1,6}` would require between 1 and 6 matches to return true, `{4,}` would require 4 or more matches to return true, and `{,7}` would require no more than 7 matches to be true.

Let's update the date search above to make it a little more readable:

```javascript
var dateTime = /\d{4}-\d{1,2}-\d{1,2} \d{1,2}:\d{2}/;
console.log(dateTime.test("2015-04-01 01:23"));
// true
```

## Grouping Subexpressions

Sometimes we want to use `+` and `*` on more than 1 character at a time. To do this, we can group expressions in parentheses and the regular expression will treat that group as a single entity.

```javascript
var cartoonCrying = /boo+(hoo+)+/i;
console.log(cartoonCrying.test("Boohoooohoohooo"));
// true
```

The first and second +'s serve to allow us all the 'o's we can handle. Then all of "hoo" is in parentheses with another + trailing, allowing as many hoo's as we can find. Finally, we add an 'i' at the end of the regular expression, outside  of the slashes. This is called a flag and we'll talk more about them later, but this one makes the whole regular expression ignore case.

## Matches And Groups

The `test` method is the simplest of regular expression tests. It tells you if there's a match and that's it. Next, let's look at the `exec` method. It returns `null` if there's no match and an informational object if there is one.

```javascript
var match = /\d+/.exec("one two 100");
console.log(match);
// ["100"]
console.log(match.index);
// 8
```

The object returned from `exec` has an `index` property that tells us where in the string match starts. The object is in fact an array and the first element is the string that matched with the regular expression.

If we use parentheses to capture subexpressions, each sub match is added as array elements.

```javascript
var quotedText = /'([^']*)'/;
console.log(quotedText.exec("she said 'hello'"));
// ["'hello'", "hello"]
```

When we use groups and nothing is matched within, an array element is added with a value of `undefined`. When a group matches many times, only the last is saved.

```javascript
console.log(/bad(ly)?/.exec("bad"));
// ["bad", undefined]
console.log(/(\d)+/.exec("123"));
// ["123", "3"]
```

Groups can be useful for extracting parts of a string. Maybe we don't want to only verify that a string contains a date, but also pull out the date parts and do something with them. We can wrap parentheses around each digit pattern and same them for later.

First though, lets talk about dates.

## The Date Type

Javascript has a standard object type that represents points in time, called `Date`. You can create a new `Date` with the `new` keyword.

```javascript
console.log(new Date());
```

We can also create dates of specific dates:

```javascript
console.log(new Date(1997, 7, 27));
// Sat Aug 27 1997 00:00:00 GMT-0500 (CDT)
console.log(new Date(1947, 0, 8, 6, 23, 00, 000));
// Sat Jan 08 1947 06:23:00 GMT-0600 (CST)
```

Javascript date do a wierd thing where January is month 0, but the first day is 1, go figure.

The last four arguments (hours, minutes, seconds, and milliseconds) are optional and assumed to be zero when not given.

Timestamps are stored as the number of milliseconds since the start of 1970, using negative numbers for times before 1970 (following a convention set by "Unix time", which was invented around that time). The `getTime` method on a date object returns this number. It is big, as you can imagine.

```javascript
console.log(new Date(1997, 7, 27).getTime());
// 872658000000
console.log(new Date(872658000000));
// Wed Aug 27 1997 00:00:00 GMT-0500 (CDT)
```

If you only use 1 argument in the `Date` constructor, it is treated as a millisecond count. You can get the current time in milliseconds either by creating a new `Date` object and calling the `getTime` mehtod, or by simply calling the `Date.now` function.

Date objects provide methods like `getFullYear`, `getMonth`, `getDate`, `getHours`, `getMinutes`, and `getSeconds` to extract their components. There's also `getYear`, which gives you a rather useless two-digit year value (such as 93 or 14).

Putting parentheses around the parts of the expression that we are interested in, we can now easily create a date object from a string.

```javascript
function findDate(string) {
    var dateTime = /(\d{4})-(\d{1,2})-(\d{1,2})/;
    var match = dateTime.exec(string);
    return new Date(Number(match[1]),
                    Number(match[2]) - 1,
                    Number(match[3]));
}
console.log(findDate("1997-8-27"));
// Wed Aug 27 1997 00:00:00 GMT-0500 (CDT)
```

## Word And String Boundaries

Unfortunately, `findDate` will also happily extract the nonsensical date 3000-1-00 from the string "30000-1-100". A match may happen anywhere in the string, so in this case, it'll just start at the second character and end at the second-to-last character.

If we want to enforce that the match must span the whole string, we can add the markers `^` and `$`. The caret matches the start of the input string, while the dollar sign matches the end. So, `/^\d+$/` matches a string consisting entirely of one or more digits, `/^!/` matches any string that starts with an exclamation mark, and `/x^/` does not match any string (there cannot be an x before the start of the string).

If, on the other hand, we just want to make sure the date starts and ends on a word boundary, we can use the marker `\b`. A word boundary can be the start or end of the string or any point in the string that has a word character (as in `\w`) on one side and a nonword character on the other.

```javascript
console.log(/cat/.test("concatenate"));
// true
console.log(/\bcat\b/.test("concatenate"));
// false
```

A boundary marker doesn't represent an actual character. It just enforces that the regular expression matches only when a certain condition holds at the place where it appears in the pattern.

## Choice Patterns

Let's imagine that we want to find a string that contains a number and the singular or plural of one of the following words "bear", "dog", or "owl".

We could write three regular expressions and test of them, but that would suck. The pipe character (|) denotes a choice between the pattern to its left and the pattern to its right. So we can say this:

```javascript
var animalCount = /\b\d+ (bear|dog|owl)s?\b/;
console.log(animalCount.test("15 bears"));
// true
console.log(animalCount.test("15 owlbears"));
// false
```

Parentheses can be used to limit the part of the pattern that the pipe operator applies to, and you can put multiple such operators next to each other to express a choice between more than two patterns.

## Backtracking

The regular expression `/\b([01]+b|\d+|[\da-f]h)\b/` matches either a binary number followed by a *b*, a regular decimal number with no suffix character, or a hexadecimal number (you know, base 16, with the letters a to f standing for the digits 10 to 15) followed by an *h*.

When we test this regular expression against the string "103", the first two digits match the binary portion, but the 3 doesn't, so that test fails and the next portion is tested, and the string is tested again from the beginning.

When the matcher starts over form the beginning of a test group, in this case the very beginning, we call this *backtracking*.

When the matcher finds a full match, it stops. This means if there are multiple possible positive matchers, only the first will return.

Backtracking also happens when we use * and +. If you match `/^.*x/` against "abcxe", the `.*` part will first try to match the whole string. The engine will then realize that it needs an `x` to match the pattern. Since there is no `x` after the end of the string, the star operator tries to match one character back. But the matcher doesn't find an `x` after `abcx` either, so it backtracks again, matching the star operator to just `abc`. Now it finds an `x` where it needs it and reports a successful match from positions 0 to 4.

## The Replace Method

String values have a replace method, which can be used to replace part of the string with another string.

```javascript
console.log("papa".replace("p", "m"));
// mapa
```

The first argument can also be a regular expression, in which case the first match of the regular expression is replaced. When the regular expression is flagged with the `g` or *global*  option, all the matches will be replaced.

```javascript
console.log("papa".replace(/p/, "m"));
// mapa
console.log("papa".replace(/p/g, "m"));
// mama
```

The real use of `replace` isn't to turn papas into mamas, but let's say we have a list of names that are formatted last-name first and we want them to read as normal names.

```javascript
console.log(
    "Hill, Hank\nFry, Phillip\nSimpson, Homer"
    .replace(/([\w ]+), ([\w ]+)/g, "$2 $1"));
// Hank Hill
// Phillip Fry
// Homer Simpson
```

The `$1` and `$2` in the replacement string refer to the parenthesized groups in the pattern. `$1` is replaced by the text that matched against the first group, `$2` by the second, and so on, up to `$9`. The whole match can be referred to with `$&`.

We can also pass a function to `replace` as the second argument rather than a string. Each match is processed by the function, which should accept an argument representing the matched string and returning something else. For example:

```javascript
var s = "the cia and fbi";
console.log(s.replace(/\b(fbi|cia)\b/g, function(str) {
    return str.toUpperCase();
}));
// the CIA and FBI
```

## Greed

Let's write some code that removes comments from Javascript.

```javascript
function stripComments(code) {
    return code.replace(/\/\/.*|\/\*[^]*\*\//g, "");
}
console.log(stripComments("1 + /* 2 */3"));
// 1 + 3
console.log(stripComments("x = 10;// ten!"));
// x = 10;
console.log(stripComments("1 /* a */+/* b */ 1"));
// 1  1
```

Here we match a string that starts with "//" or one that starts with "/*" and ends with "*/", you know Javascript comments. We use `[^]` which means a not-empty set to match any character, including newlines because using the period typically doesn't include newlines.

Something went wrong though.

The `[^]*` part of the expression will match as much as it can. If the next part of the matcher fails, then that first part will start moving backwards from the last letter until the whole expression can pass. Here, it will match everything up to the last "*/" instead of stopping at the end of the first comment.

This behavior is called being *greedy*, it applies to `+`, `*`, `?`, and `{}`, and it means that these operators will match as much as possible before backtracking. If we want a more mindful regular expression, we can make it nongreedy by adding a question mark at the end (`+?`, `*?`, `??`, `{}?`). Nongreedy expressions match as little as possible and only match more when the rest of the pattern doesn't match.

That's what we want here, so let's update our code

```javascript
function stripComments(code) {
    return code.replace(/\/\/.*|\/\*[^]*?\*\//g, "");
}
console.log(stripComments("1 + /* 2 */3"));
// 1 + 3
console.log(stripComments("x = 10;// ten!"));
// x = 10;
console.log(stripComments("1 /* a */+/* b */ 1"));
// 1 + 1
```

Many bugs in regular expressions are related to them being greedy, when you use th repeating operators, think about going nongreedy first.

## Dynamically Creating Regexp Objects

Sometimes we don't know exactly what our pattern needs to match against while we are writing code. Imagine you want to look for the user's name in a piece of text and enclose it in underscore characters to make it stand out. Since you will know the name only once the program is actually running, you can't use the slash-based notation.

We can build up a string and use the `RegExp` constructor on that.

```javascript
var name = "rob";
var text = "Rob is a shady guy.";
var regexp = new RegExp("\\b(" + name + ")\\b", "gi");
console.log(text.replace(regexp, "_$1_"));
// _Rob_ is a shady guy.
```

When we use the `\b` boundry markers in the `RegExp` constructor, we need to escape it twice, `\\b`. The second argument contains any options you want the regular expression to have, in this case we use `gi` for global and case-insensitive.

What would we do if our user was a Call of Duty player known as `"L33+hax[]r360noscop3"`? There's a bunch of character's that would normally choke a regular expression.

What we'll do is escape any character we aren't sure about, let's say everything that isn't a letter, number, or whitespace.

```javascript
var name = "L33+hax[]r360noscop3";
var text = "The L33+hax[]r360noscop3 pwned your mom.";
var escaped = name.replace(/[^\w\s]/g, "\\$&");
var regexp = new RegExp("\\b(" + escaped + ")\\b", "gi");
console.log(text.replace(regexp, "_$1_"));
// The _L33+hax[]r360noscop3_ pwned your mom.
```

## The Search Method

The `indexOf` method for strings doesn't accept a regular expression. Instead, we'll use `search`. It returns the first index in which the expression was found, or -1 if nothing is found.

```javascript
console.log("  word".search(/\S/));
// 2
console.log("    ".search(/\S/));
// -1
```

Also unlike `indexOf`, we don't get to pass `search` an second argument defining an offset to start at, which sucks.

## The Lastindex Property

The `exec` method we looked at above doesn't accept an offset argument either. But we can find a way around that.

Regular expression objects have several properties. One is `source`, which contains a string that expression was created from. The `lastIndex` property will tell us the offset from where we can start looking for the next match.

For this to work, we must meet two prerequisites. First, me must use the `exec` method. Second, the regular expression must be flagged to search globally, that is, with the `g` flag. Let's look at an example.

```javascript
var pattern = /y/g;
pattern.lastIndex;
// 0
var match = pattern.exec("xyzzy");
console.log(match.index);
// 1
console.log(pattern.lastIndex);
// 2
match = pattern.exec("xyzzy"); // Do it again!
console.log(match.index);
// 4
console.log(pattern.lastIndex);
// 5
```

If the match was successful, the call to `exec` will update the `lastIndex` property, otherwise it is set to zero.

When using a regular expression for multiple searches in the global scope, be careful as the `lastIndex` property may not have been set back to zero.

```javascript
var digit = /\d/g;
console.log(digit.exec("here it is: 1"));
// ["1", index: 12, input: "here it is: 1"]
console.log(digit.exec("and now: 1"));
// null
```

Flagging a regular expression as a global search does things to the other `RegExp` methods. Let's look at `match`. When we do a normal search, it returns an array just like `exec`, however when we match globally, we get an array with all the matches instead.

```javascript
console.log("Banana".match(/an/));
// ["an", index: 1, input: "Banana"]
console.log("Banana".match(/an/g));
// ["an", "an"]
```

Bottom line, we should be careful when using global search, in fact, we should probably only use them in methods such as `replace` and where we'll need to use `lastIndex`.

### Looping Over Matches

It is a common pattern to loop through all the occurrences of a pattern in a string.

```javascript
var input = "There are 10 types of people in the world: \n 1. Those who read binary. \n 2. Those who don't.";
var number = /\b(\d+)\b/g;
var match;
while (match = number.exec(input)) {
    console.log("Found", match[1], "at", match.index);
}
// Found 10 at 10
// Found 1 at 45
// Found 2 at 73
```

Here, we are defining a value within the `while` condition so as long as it's truthy, the loop will continue to run.

## Parsing An ini File

Let's  imagine we want to convert an `.ini` file to something usable in Javascript. `.ini` files after all are very commonly used to store application configurations. Each line in an `.ini` file is a separate setting as long as it has an equal sign "=", lines in square brackets "[]" separate sections, lines beginning with semicolons ";" are comments, and everything else is invalid. A typical `.ini` file looks like this:

```ini
siteroot=/var/www/site/public
random_key=28467157

[all]
hostname=all
name=thisname
db.host=127.0.0.1
db.user=username
db.pass=password
db.name=live
one.two.three=multi

; Settings for all staging sites
[staging:all]
hostname=staging
db.name=dbstaging
debug=false

[other_staging]
only_in=otherStaging
db.pass=anotherpwd
```

We want to create an object for each section in the `.ini` file and inner objects for each directive in a section.

A good place to start would be by splitting the string into an array by line. We could use `string.split("\n");`, but in some operating systems new lines are denoted with a carriage return and a newline, `("\r\n")`. We know that `string.split` allows regular expressions in its argument, so we can use `/\r?\n/` to catch both "`\r\n`" and "`\n`" between the lines.

```javascript
function parseINI(string) {
    // Start with an object to hold the top-level fields
    var currentSection = {name: null, fields: []};
    var categories = [currentSection];

    string.split(/\r?\n/).forEach(function(line) {
        var match;
        if (/^\s*(;.*)?$/.test(line)) {
            return;
        } else if (match = line.match(/^\[(.*)\]$/)) {
            currentSection = {name: match[1], fields: []};
            categories.push(currentSection);
        } else if (match = line.match(/^(\w+)=(.*)$/)) {
            currentSection.fields.push({name: match[1], value: match[2]});
        } else {
            throw new Error("Line '" + line + "' is invalid.");
        }
    });

    return categories;
}
```

After we split the string into lines, this function goes over each one, updating the "current section" object. First, it checks if the line is a comment line or if it is a line with only whitespace and ignores those. Then it checks to see if the line is the beginning of a new section. If it is, we create a new section object, to which settings will be added. Next, it checks if the line is a setting line, if so, it adds the name and value as properties of the last section object. Finally, if none of those things are true, we throw an error.

Take note that we use both `^` and `$` to make sure we are matching against the whole line. The program will still mostly work if we don't include those, but bugs will get hard to solve.

We use `if (match = string.match(...))` just like with the `while` statement earlier.

## International Characters

Javascript regular expressions are very English-centric. The word character (`\w`) for example only treats The English alphabet numbers, and the underscore "_" as valid. That means that N-tilde (ñ) and the U-umlaut (ü) won't get any love here. All these characters are seen as nonword (`\W`) characters.

The whitespace character (`\s`) will match all unicode whitespace characters.

## Summary

| RegExp | What it matches |
| ------ | --------------- |
| /abc/ | A sequence of characters |
| /[abc]/ | Any character from a set of characters |
| /[^abc]/ | Any character not in a set of characters |
| /[0-9]/ | Any character in a range of characters |
| /x+/ | One or more occurrences of the pattern x |
| /x+?/ | One or more occurrences, nongreedy |
| /x*/ | Zero or more occurrences |
| /x?/ | Zero or one occurrence |
| /x{2,4}/ | Between two and four occurrences |
| /(abc)/ | A group |
| /a|b|c/ | Any one of several patterns |
| /\d/ | Any digit character |
| /\w/ | An alphanumeric character (“word character”) |
| /\s/ | Any whitespace character |
| /./ | Any character except newlines |
| /\b/ | A word boundary |
| /^/ | Start of input |
| /$/ | End of input |

Regular expressions can be built using a constructor with a string passed or as a literal between two forward slashes "/".

There are the `test` and `exec` methods for regular expressions. They tell you if a string or regular expression can be found in another string with `exec` also returning some other useful info in an array.

Strings have `match` to match them against a regular expression and `search` to search for one. You can find and replace parts of a string with `replace`.

## Exercises

### Regexp golf

*Code golf* is a term used for the game of trying to express a particular program in as few characters as possible. Similarly, *regexp golf* is the practice of writing as tiny a regular expression as possible to match a given pattern, and only that pattern.

For each of the following items, write a regular expression to test whether any of the given substrings occur in a string. The regular expression should match only strings containing one of the substrings described. Do not worry about word boundaries unless explicitly mentioned. When your expression works, see whether you can make it any smaller.

1. *car* and *cat*
1. *pop* and *prop*
1. *ferret*, *ferry*, and *ferrari*
1. Any word ending in *ious*
1. A whitespace character followed by a dot, comma, colon, or semicolon
1. A word longer than six letters
1. A word without the letter *

Refer to the table in the chapter summary above for help. Test each solution with a few test strings.

```javascript
// Fill in the regular expressions
function verify(regexp, yes, no) {
    "use strict";
    // Ignore unfinished exercises
    if (regexp.source === "...") { return; }
    yes.forEach(function(s) {
        if (!regexp.test(s)) {
            console.log("Failure to match '" + s + "'");
        }
    });
    no.forEach(function(s) {
        if (regexp.test(s)) {
            console.log("Unexpected match for '" + s + "'");
        }
    });
}

verify(/.../, ["my car", "bad cats"], ["camper", "high art"]);
verify(/.../, ["pop culture", "mad props"], ["plop"]);
verify(/.../, ["ferret", "ferry", "ferrari"], ["ferrum", "transfer A"]);
verify(/.../, ["how delicious", "spacious room"], ["ruinous", "consciousness"]);
verify(/.../, ["bad punctuation ."], ["escape the dot"]);
verify(/.../, ["hottentottententen"], ["no", "hotten totten tenten"]);
verify(/.../, ["red platypus", "wobbling nest"], ["earth bed", "learning ape"]);

```
